Title: Fuzzing with Agents? Generators Are All You Need

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01442v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:13:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Fuzzing with Agents? Generators Are All You Need 

# Vasudev Vikram 

Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA, USA vasumv@cmu.edu 

# Rohan Padhye 

Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA, USA rohanpadhye@cmu.edu 

## ABSTRACT 

Modern generator-based fuzzing techniques combine lightweight input generators with coverage-guided mutation as a method of ex-ploring deep execution paths in a target program. A complimentary approach in prior research focuses on creating highly customized, domain-specific generators that encode structural and semantic logic sufficient enough to reach deep program states; the challenge comes from the overhead of writing and testing these complex gen-erators. We investigate whether AI coding agents can automatically synthesize such target-specific generators, and whether the result-ing generators are strong enough to obviate the need for coverage guidance and mutation entirely. Our approach, Gentoo , is comprised of an LLM coding agent (provided terminal access and source code of the fuzz target and its library) instructed to iteratively synthesize and refine an in-put generator, and optionally provided fine-grained predicate-level coverage feedback. We evaluate three configurations of Gentoo 

against human-written generators on fuzz targets for 7 real-world Java libraries. Our findings show that agent-synthesized genera-tors achieve statistically significantly higher branch coverage than human-written baseline generators on 4 of 7 benchmarks. Criti-cally, the use of coverage guidance and mutation strategies is not 

statistically significantly beneficial for agent-synthesized genera-tors, but is significant for all human-written generators, suggesting that structural and semantic logic encoded in the agent generators makes coverage guidance largely unnecessary. 

ACM Reference Format: 

Vasudev Vikram and Rohan Padhye. 2026. Fuzzing with Agents? Generators Are All You Need. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Fuzz testing is a widely used technique for finding bugs and vulner-abilities in software by repeatedly executing a program with auto-matically generated random inputs [ 7, 14 , 16 , 19 , 20 , 30 , 39 , 44 , 51 ]. A fundamental challenge in fuzz testing is generating inputs that are both structurally valid and semantically meaningful: inputs that are too random are rejected early by validation checks, while inputs that are too simple fail to reach the deep program logic where interesting bugs live. This challenge motivated greybox fuzzing [ 66 ], in which  

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
> ©2026 Association for Computing Machinery. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

Prior work: Coverage-guided parametric fuzzing 

Predicate-guided generator synthesis 

010011010 

010010110 

Figure 1: Comparison of prior approaches (coverage-guided parametric fuzzing) with our proposed approach Gentoo :agentic synthesis of input generators with fine-grained pred-icate feedback. 

a corpus of inputs is gradually mutated and evolved, saving new in-put candidates that increase overall branch coverage and discarding those that do not. By making small, incremental changes to known "interesting" inputs, greybox fuzzing can efficiently reach deep pro-gram states well beyond validation checks [11, 13, 32, 34, 42, 46]. Parametric generator-based fuzzing [ 25 , 45 – 47 ] combines cov-erage guidance and mutation-based fuzzing with lightweight gen-erator functions that produce structurally valid inputs for a given target program. JQF [ 46 ] and Zest [ 47 ] showed this is possible by treating generators as parametric decoders : functions that consume an arbitrary byte sequence to produce a structured input, so that byte-level mutations from a coverage-guided fuzzer translate di-rectly into structured mutations on the generated input without requiring specialized mutators.  

> arXiv:2604.01442v1 [cs.SE] 1 Apr 2026 Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Vasudev Vikram and Rohan Padhye

A complementary line of work focuses on building heavyweight, highly customized, domain-specific generators that encode hard input constraints directly into the generation logic. Tools such as CSmith [ 52 , 65 ] for C compilers and SQLancer [ 8] for database engines generate inputs that are not merely syntactically valid but semantically rich by construction: CSmith emits C programs free of undefined behavior, while SQLancer produces queries that satisfy the relational schemas and type rules of the target database. By encoding deep input and domain logic into the generators, these tools routinely expose bugs that generic mutation-based fuzzers miss entirely, because the bugs only manifest on inputs that satisfy constraints random mutations are less likely to produce. Notably, such heavyweight generators do not employ coverage guidance nor mutation strategies, since the generation logic itself is strong enough that neither is necessary. The limitation, however, is that such generators require substantial manual effort to write and are tightly coupled to a single target. With the rise of large language models (LLMs) capable of au-tomating complex software engineering tasks [ 22 , 29 , 36 , 41 , 56 , 61 ,64 ], a natural instinct is to apply them to fuzz testing and input generation tasks. Recent work has used LLMs to synthesize fuzz drivers [ 35 , 38 , 40 , 62 ] and input generators [ 15 , 68 ], demonstrating that LLMs can produce generation logic that improves fuzz test-ing applicability and performance. However, these approaches use LLMs to improve components within the mutation-based fuzzing paradigm, still operating on the assumption that the coverage guid-ance loop itself is necessary. We believe synthesizing input gener-ators is a well-suited task for AI coding agents , requiring a deep understanding of source code and the ability to translate program semantics into input generation logic. In particular, we are focused on the following motivating question: can agentic synthesis of cus-tomized input generators obviate the need for coverage guidance and mutation-based fuzzing? 

## 1.1 Motivating Example 

Consider the type-checking logic in the ChocoPy compiler [ 48 ], which compiles programs from a typed subset of Python into RISC-V assembly. To exercise the type-checking logic beyond its entry point, the fuzzer must produce inputs that are not only syntactically valid programs but also well-typed ones, a constraint that no generic mutation strategy can efficiently satisfy without understanding the target’s semantics. Figure 2a shows a simple ChocoPy program. ChocoPy is a stati-cally typed subset of Python where every variable and function sig-nature carries an explicit type annotation. Figure 2b shows two spe-cific branches from the ChocoPy compiler DeclarationAnalyzer 

that must be reached to exercise deep type-checking logic. The predicate on line 3 ( parentMethodDecl != null ) is reached only when the input program defines a class that inherits from another class and overrides one of its methods: the fuzzer must generate at least two classes in an inheritance relationship with a method of the same name in both. Even if a grammar-based sampler produces a syntactically valid ChocoPy program, the probability that it hap-pens to include an inheritance hierarchy with a method override is very low. The predicate on line 5 ( !signatureMatches ) is reached only when that overriding method has a different type signature                                 

> # Search in a list
> def contains(items:[int], x:int) -> bool: i:int = 0
> while i < len(items):
> if items[i] == x:
> return True
> i = i + 1
> return False
> (a) A simple ChocoPy program. ChocoPy is a statically typed subset of Python where all variables and function signatures carry explicit type annotations.
> 1// Reached only if input declares a class that inherits
> 2// from another class AND redefines one of its methods
> 3if (parentMethodDecl != null ) { // predicate 1
> 4// ... check parameter types and return type match ...
> 5if (!signatureMatches) { // predicate 2
> 6err(methodName,
> 7"Method overridden with different type signature: %s",
> 8methodName.name);
> 9}
> 10 }
> (b) Two example branches from the ChocoPy compiler
> DeclarationAnalyzer Java source code (simplified). Line 3re-quires an input with an inheritance hierarchy and a method override; line 5 additionally requires the override to have a mismatched type signature.

from the parent’s method. We hypothesize that a specialized input generator should encode this logic directly, generating ChocoPy programs with inheritance hierarchies and method overrides by construction, rather than relying on coverage guidance and muta-tions to produce them. 

## 1.2 Contributions 

We investigate the ability of agentic methods to synthesize target-specific input generators for fuzz testing. Effective synthesis re-quires: (1) giving the agent the tooling and source context to write a generator, (2) measuring the gap between what the current gen-erator produces and what the target’s deep predicates require, and (3) iterating and refining the generator to close that gap. The mechanism we choose to measure and close this gap is 

predicate feedback . On the static side, we apply interprocedural control-flow analysis to rank all conditional branches in the library under test by their branch dominance score, identifying the predi-cates whose outcomes unlock the most unexplored code. On the dynamic side, we instrument the fuzzer to track, for each saved input, which branch each tracked predicate takes, producing a per-predicate coverage report that tells the agent not just whether a predicate was reached but how consistently its harder branch is satisfied. We name the resulting system Gentoo (gen erate the 

gen erator, shown in Figure 1), and evaluate three configurations: 

Gentoo-S , which uses static dominator analysis to rank predicates; 

Gentoo-L , which instead asks the agent to identify and rank pred-icates from source code; and Gentoo-Base , a plain coding agent with no predicate guidance. Fuzzing with Agents? Generators Are All You Need Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

We evaluate all three configurations on seven real-world Java benchmarks spanning bytecode parsing, ASN.1 cryptographic struc-tures, JavaScript compilation and interpretation, BZip2 compres-sion, JSON parsing, and ChocoPy compilation. For each bench-mark we compare against human-written generators from prior work [ 47 , 55 , 57 ] and measure both coverage-guided and random fuzzing to assess whether the synthesized generators reduce the need for mutation-based exploration. Our evaluation yields three main takeaways. First, agent-synthesized generators achieve higher branch coverage than human-written generators on 6 of 7 benchmarks (4 statistically sig-nificant), by 11 –21% on average, suggesting that agentic synthesis is a viable and competitive alternative to manual generator develop-ment. Second, running the synthesized generators under coverage-guided fuzzing yields marginal improvements over random sam-pling (typically under 3%), and these differences are not statisti-cally significant, supporting the hypothesis that a well-synthesized generator can largely stand on its own without coverage-guided mutation. Third, predicate feedback measurably refines genera-tors across iterations – Gentoo-S and Gentoo-L improve over their first-iteration baselines by 18 –57% on average respectively – yet final coverage is broadly comparable across all three Gentoo 

configurations, indicating that the initial agent synthesis accounts for most of the coverage gain and predicate feedback provides an additional but not dominant boost. 

## 2 BACKGROUND 2.1 Coverage-Guided Fuzzing 

Coverage-guided greybox fuzzing (CGF) is a technique for auto-mated test-input generation using lightweight program instrumen-tation, popularized by AFL [ 66 ]. As shown in the top half of Figure 1, the fuzzer maintains an input pool (or corpus) of saved inputs. At each iteration, a seed input is selected from the pool, typically according to an energy schedule that favors seeds that have histori-cally produced coverage-increasing mutations [ 12 ]. The selected seed is then mutated , commonly by applying random byte-level op-erations such as bit flips, byte substitutions, or block insertions and deletions, to produce a new candidate input 𝑥 ′. The program is exe-cuted on 𝑥 ′ under instrumentation that records the set of branches exercised during the run. If 𝑥 ′ exercises at least one branch not covered by any input already in the pool, it is added to the pool and becomes eligible for future mutation. This saving criterion en-sures the pool grows incrementally toward broader coverage, while inputs that do not increase coverage are discarded. The effectiveness of this feedback loop depends critically on the ability of byte-level mutations to produce inputs that satisfy the program’s structural constraints. For programs that accept highly structured inputs, such as compilers, parsers, or serialization li-braries, most random byte mutations produce malformed inputs that fail early validation, preventing the fuzzer from reaching the deeper program logic where interesting bugs tend to live. 

## 2.2 Parametric Generator-Based Fuzzing 

Property-based testing frameworks such as QuickCheck [ 2 , 17 , 23 ]ask the developer to supply a generator : a function that produces  

> String generate(SourceOfRandomness random, ...) { String program = ""; // int numFunctions = random.nextInt(1, 5); // for each function: generate signature, typed params, body... // program += generateFunction(random); // ...
> return program; }

Figure 3: Skeleton of a JQF Generator for ChocoPy. The gener-ator uses SourceOfRandomness to make random choices that produce a structured string input. 

random, structurally valid values by making a sequence of ran-dom choices, such as selecting an element from a set or deciding the length of a list. Generators can encode arbitrarily rich struc-tural invariants, ensuring that every generated input satisfies the constraints required to pass shallow validation and reach deeper program logic. For example, a JQF generator for ChocoPy programs might look like Figure 3. Zest [ 47 ] and JQF [ 46 ] bridge generator-based and coverage-guided fuzzing through the concept of a parametric generator .The key idea is to back the random source used by a generator with an explicit byte stream 𝐵 . Each call to the random API (e.g., 

nextBoolean() , nextInt() ) consumes one or more bytes from 

𝐵 and uses their values to resolve the corresponding generation decision. The generator is then deterministic given 𝐵 : replaying the same stream always produces the same structured input. This makes the byte stream an underlying representation of the gen-erated input, and byte-level mutations on 𝐵 correspond directly to structured mutations on the generated output without requir-ing specialized mutators. A coverage-guided fuzzer can therefore operate on 𝐵 as it would on any raw input, applying its existing mutation operators and saving criterion, while the generator de-terministically decodes 𝐵 into a structurally valid input at each execution. Despite this elegant combination, parametric generators are sub-ject to the havoc effect [ 59 ]: mutations to bytes that influence early branching decisions in the generator can drastically restructure the generated input, causing large jumps in the structured input space that undermine the incremental exploration on which coverage guidance relies. Even so, the lightweight generators combined with coverage guidance represent a substantial improvement over raw byte mutation for structured inputs [ 47 ]. Understanding which pro-gram predicates block deeper exploration, and targeting generation toward satisfying them, is the natural next step. 

## 2.3 Control-Flow Analysis and Dominators 

To identify which predicates are worth adding custom generation logic for, we need a principled way to rank them by how much unexplored code they control. A program’s control-flow graph (CFG) is a directed graph where nodes represent basic blocks and edges represent possible transfers of control. A predicate is a conditional branch with two (or more) successor blocks, each corresponding to a possible outcome of the branch condition. Predicates act as gatekeepers: a predicate that Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Vasudev Vikram and Rohan Padhye 

must be satisfied to reach some region of the program blocks all coverage of that region until an input satisfying it is found. The gatekeeping relationships in a CFG are formalized by the 

dominator tree . A node 𝑑 dominates node 𝑛 if every path from the entry of the CFG to 𝑛 passes through 𝑑 . The dominator tree organizes these relationships hierarchically: 𝑑 is the parent of 𝑛 

in the tree if 𝑑 is the immediate dominator of 𝑛 , the closest strict dominator of 𝑛 along any entry-to-𝑛 path. We define the branch dominance score to quantify how much code each outcome of a predicate controls. Let 𝑝 be a predicate with successor blocks 𝑏 1, 𝑏 2, . . . . For each successor 𝑏 𝑖 , let 𝑅 (𝑏 𝑖 ) be the set of CFG nodes reachable from 𝑏 𝑖 and let 𝐷 (𝑏 𝑖 ) be the set of CFG nodes dominated by 𝑏 𝑖 in the dominator tree. The branch dominance score of outcome 𝑏 𝑖 is dom (𝑏 𝑖 ) = |𝑅 (𝑏 𝑖 ) ∩ 𝐷 (𝑏 𝑖 )| ,

the number of nodes that are both exclusively controlled by tak-ing branch 𝑏 𝑖 and reachable from it. A high branch dominance score indicates that a particular outcome of the predicate unlocks a large region of otherwise unreachable program logic. The overall dominance score of the predicate 𝑝 is dom (𝑝 ) = max 𝑖 dom (𝑏 𝑖 ).By ranking predicates by dominance score, we can identify the branch conditions most worth targeting: those whose unsatisfied outcomes block the broadest regions of the program. 

## 3 APPROACH 

We investigate the ability of agentic methods to synthesize target-specific input generators for fuzz testing. The core idea is to give a coding agent three things: the source context and tooling needed to write a generator, a way to measure the gap between what the generator currently produces and what the target requires, and the ability to iterate and refine the generator to close that gap. Our system Gentoo (gen erate the gen erator), shown in Figure 1, produces a JQF input generator via an iterative agent loop. We evaluate three configurations of Gentoo that differ in how the gap is measured and communicated to the agent. Gentoo-Base 

provides the agent with terminal access to inspect JQF execution statistics and examine generated inputs, without any additional analysis; the agent infers what to improve from the raw fuzzing output alone. Gentoo-S and Gentoo-L both go further by provid-ing predicate-level feedback that directly measures which branches of high-value predicates the current generator fails to reach. They differ in how the important predicates are identified: Gentoo-S 

uses static interprocedural dominator analysis to rank predicates by the amount of code each branch controls, while Gentoo-L instead asks the agent to analyze the library source code and identify the predicates it judges most important. 

## 3.1 Dominator Predicate Analysis 

The first strategy for identifying high-value predicates, used by 

Gentoo-S , is static interprocedural CFG analysis. The fuzz target defines one or more entry points into the library under test – the library methods that the target invokes on each generated input. Starting from these entry points, Gentoo constructs an interproce-dural CFG 1 and computes its dominator tree. For each conditional branch in this CFG, Gentoo computes the branch dominance score dom (𝑏 𝑖 ) = |𝑅 (𝑏 𝑖 ) ∩ 𝐷 (𝑏 𝑖 )| from Section 2, where 𝑅 (𝑏 𝑖 ) is the set of CFG nodes reachable from branch outcome 𝑏 𝑖 and 𝐷 (𝑏 𝑖 ) is the set of nodes dominated by 𝑏 𝑖 .The output is a ranked list of predicate records, sorted by the maximum branch dominance score across all outcomes of each pred-icate. Each predicate record identifies the predicate by its source class, method, and line number, and lists each of its branch out-comes with its individual dominance score. This list is passed to the agent as the primary guide for what generation logic to add: predicates at the top of the ranking gate the most code, so sat-isfying their harder-to-reach branch outcomes unlocks the most additional coverage. Figure 4a shows an example predicate record from ChocoPy’s TypeChecker , with overall dominance score 50 and two branches with scores 10 and 40 respectively. We implement this analysis using the WALA static analysis framework [1]. 

3.1.1 LLM Predicate Identification. As an alternative used by 

Gentoo-L , the agent itself scans the library source code and pro-duces a ranked predicate list without running a static analyzer. Given the fuzz target and library source, the agent reads relevant classes, identifies conditional statements whose branches it judges to require non-trivial inputs to satisfy, and orders them by estimated importance. This approach requires no pre-built static analysis tool-ing and leverages the agent’s natural-language understanding of the code’s intent. Figure 4 illustrates the two data structures passed to the agent for a predicate in ChocoPy’s TypeChecker . The predicate at line 206 of analyzePlus is leftType.equals(rightType) , the type check for the + operator. Its branch at line 207 (taken when both operands share the same type, e.g. int + int ) controls only 10 nodes, while the branch at line 208 (taken when both operands are lists of dif-ferent element types, triggering least-upper-bound computation) controls 40 nodes. After fuzzing, the dynamic record reveals that 798 inputs took the low-value branch (line 207) while only 24 took the high-value branch (line 208), out of 822 total inputs that reached this predicate. To reach line 208 the generator must produce a ChocoPy program that applies + to two lists with different element types (e.g. 

[1,2] + ["hello"] ), a specific semantic constraint that a generic generator almost never satisfies by chance. 

## 3.2 Dynamic Predicate Feedback 

Both Gentoo-S and Gentoo-L provide the agent with fine-grained per-predicate feedback by adding instrumentation on top of the standard coverage-guided fuzzer. At each conditional branch corre-sponding to a tracked predicate, the fuzzer records which branch outcome each saved input takes. After the campaign, this produces a predicate coverage report that summarizes, for each predicate and each branch outcome, the number of distinct saved inputs that triggered that branch. This per-branch view goes beyond aggregate branch coverage, which only tells the agent whether a predicate was ever reached. The predicate coverage report additionally reveals how consistently             

> 1Each benchmark has an exclusions list to filter out non-application-specific classes, such as standard java.lang classes, keeping the analysis focused on library code. Fuzzing with Agents? Generators Are All You Need Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
> {
> "class" : "...TypeChecker",
> "method" : "analyzePlus",
> "line" : 206,
> "branches" : [ {"line" : 207, "dominance" : 10 }, {"line" : 208, "dominance" : 40 } ]}
> (a) Static predicate record: source location, overall dominance score, and per-branch dominance scores.
> {
> "class" : "...TypeChecker",
> "method" : "analyzePlus",
> "predicateLine" : 206,
> "predicateInputs" : 822,
> "branches" : [ {"line" : 207, "inputs" : 798 }, {"line" : 208, "inputs" : 24 }]}
> (b) Dynamic predicate record: per-branch input counts after a fuzzing campaign. The high-dominance branch at line 208 was taken by only 24 of 822 inputs that reached this predicate.

Figure 4: Static (a) and dynamic (b) predicate records for a predicate in ChocoPy’s TypeChecker . The static record iden-tifies that line 208 is the high-value branch; the dynamic record reveals the generator rarely produces inputs that take it, making it a direct target for refinement. 

the generator produces inputs that satisfy each branch condition. A predicate with a high dominance score whose harder branch is hit by very few inputs is a direct target for refinement: it gates a large amount of code, and the current generator rarely produces inputs that unlock it. Figure 4b shows the dynamic record for the same TypeChecker predicate: 798 inputs took the low-value branch (line 207) and only 24 took the high-value branch (line 208) that controls 40 nodes, making it an obvious refinement target. 

## 3.3 Agent-based Generator Synthesis 

All three configurations drive generator synthesis using the Claude Agent SDK [ 6 ], which provides the agent with terminal access and file editing capabilities (Table 1). All configurations receive the same base instructions: read through the fuzz target and library source code, synthesize a JQF-style Generator class targeting maximum branch coverage, and iteratively refine it. To support the refinement loop, we provide the agent with additional documentation on using JQF via the terminal to run short-scale fuzzing sessions (2 minutes) and to replay the saved corpus of inputs, allowing the agent to directly inspect the inputs its current generator produces. Each configuration additionally receives feedback tailored to its strategy. For Gentoo-L , the agent is instructed to scan the library source code, identify the conditional predicates it judges most important for coverage, and produce a predicate records file in the format described in Section 3.1.1. For Gentoo-S , the agent is pointed to the pre-computed predicate records file produced by the dominator analysis (Section 3.1). In both cases, the agent uses the predicate records alongside the dynamic per-branch coverage report from the previous fuzzing session to identify which high-value predicates remain underserved and revise the generator accordingly. 

Gentoo-Base receives neither; it refines the generator based solely on JQF execution statistics and its own inspection of the generated inputs. We deliberately chose this lightweight, freeform approach rather than enforcing a rigid synthesis pipeline. By giving the agent ter-minal access and open-ended instructions, it can interleave reading source code, inspecting generated inputs, running fuzzing sessions, and editing the generator in whatever order it finds most productive, without being constrained to a fixed sequence of steps. 

## 4 EVALUATION 

We evaluate Gentoo to explore how agent-synthesized generators compare to human-written baselines, and to understand the impact of coverage guidance and predicate-level feedback on generator quality. Our evaluation is structured around four research questions: 

RQ1 Do agent-synthesized generators achieve higher coverage than human-written generators? 

RQ2 Can agent-synthesized generators eliminate the need for coverage guidance and mutation-based fuzzing? 

RQ3 Does fine-grained predicate feedback improve coverage of agent-synthesized generators? 

RQ4 How does LLM predicate analysis compare to static domina-tor analysis? 

## 4.1 Experimental Setup 

4.1.1 Techniques and Baselines. We evaluate all three Gentoo con-figurations ( Gentoo-S , Gentoo-L , Gentoo-Base ) against human-written generator baselines taken from prior work [ 47 , 55 , 57 ]. For all configurations and baselines, we evaluate both coverage-guided mutation-based fuzzing using the Zest algorithm and random input generation (no mutations), to assess the contribution of the fuzzing engine independently of generator quality. The mean cost per syn-thesized generator is $7.54 for Gentoo-Base , $12.17 for Gentoo-S ,and $12.84 for Gentoo-L (using Claude Opus 4.5 via AWS Bedrock). 

4.1.2 Benchmarks. We evaluate on six real-world Java library benchmarks, keeping fuzz targets consistent with prior work [ 47 ,55 , 57 ]: Apache BCEL (Java bytecode parser), Bouncy Cas-tle (ASN.1/cryptographic structure parser), Google Closure 

(JavaScript compiler), Apache Commons Compress (BZip2 com-pressor/decompressor), Gson (JSON parser), and Mozilla Rhino 

(JavaScript interpreter). These benchmarks span a range of input formats with hard structural constraints, from recursive data for-mats (JSON, ASN.1) to language compilers and interpreters, that are particularly challenging for mutation-based fuzzers without structured input generators. 

4.1.3 Duration. Each generator synthesis run is allotted a maxi-mum of one hour of wall-clock time. Each synthesized generator is then evaluated in a separate fuzzing campaign of three hours. 

4.1.4 Repetitions. All experiments are repeated five times with different random seeds, and we report the mean and standard devi-ation across runs. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Vasudev Vikram and Rohan Padhye 

Table 1: Comparison of Gentoo configurations. All share terminal access, file editing, library source code, and JQF tooling (compile, fuzz, corpus replay).           

> Config Predicate identification System prompt (summary)
> Gentoo-Base None Read source, write generator, refine based on JQF stats and corpus inspection.
> Gentoo-L LLM source analysis +Identify important predicates from source and produce a predicate record; use the predicate coverage report after each run to identify uncovered high-dominance branches and refine the generator.
> Gentoo-S Static dominator analysis +Read the pre-computed predicate record; use the predicate coverage report after each run to identify uncovered high-dominance branches and refine the generator.

Commons Compress 

(303) 

Gson 

(665) 

Bouncy Castle 

(1065) 

ChocoPy 

(3017) 

BCEL 

(4683) 

Rhino 

(7281) 

Closure 

(16333) 

0.2 

0.3 

0.5 

1

2

3 

> Branch coverage relative to human baseline
> *
> *
> *
> *
> *
> *
> *
> **
> *
> *
> *

Technique 

Human 

Gentoo-Base 

Gentoo-L 

Gentoo-S 

Figure 5: Branch coverage (mean ± std across five repetitions) for each technique and benchmark, normalized relative to the human-written generator baseline. Higher is better, * is statistically significance on a Mann-Whitney U test. In 4 out of 7 benchmarks, at least one agent-based approach significantly higher coverage. 

4.1.5 Metrics. We evaluate generators along two dimensions: (1) Execution speed : the average number of inputs executed per second across the entire fuzzing campaign, reflecting the throughput cost of more complex generators. (2) Branch coverage : the number of branches covered during a fuzzing campaign. We report coverage normalized relative to the human-written generator baseline to enable comparison across benchmarks with different absolute coverage. 

4.1.6 Scale. In total, our evaluation comprises 3 × 7 × 5 = 105 

agent synthesis runs across the three Gentoo configurations, 7 benchmarks, and 5 repetitions, producing 101 synthesized gener-ators (4 runs failed to produce a compilable generator within the time budget). Each synthesized generator and each human-written generator is evaluated in both coverage-guided and random fuzzing modes, yielding 280 three-hour fuzzing experiments in total. The full evaluation required approximately 39 CPU-days of computa-tion. 

## 4.2 RQ1: Coverage of synthesized generators 

Do agent-synthesized generators achieve higher coverage than human-written generators? 

We evaluate branch coverage and execution throughput (as reported by JQF) across all three Gentoo configurations and the human-written baselines. 

Branch coverage. Figure 5 shows mean branch coverage nor-malized relative to the human-written generator for each bench-mark. In 6 out of 7 benchmarks, at least one agent configuration Fuzzing with Agents? Generators Are All You Need Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

matches or exceeds the human baseline, with the best agent configu-ration ranging from +2% (ChocoPy) to +148% (Commons) above hu-man coverage. In 4 of those benchmarks (Closure, Commons, Gson, Rhino), at least one agent configuration achieves statistically signif-icantly higher coverage than the human baseline (Mann-Whitney U, 𝑝 < 0.05 , marked with ∗ in Figure 5). The exception is BCEL, where all agent configurations fall 54% below the human baseline; as discussed below, the human BCEL generator uses BCEL’s own high-level API to construct class files, giving it a structural advan-tage that the agent does not discover. For Rhino, Gentoo-S achieves 31% higher coverage than the hu-man baseline, reaching up to 9804 branches versus 7323 for the hu-man generator. The synthesized generator encodes domain-specific JavaScript constructs targeted at Rhino’s parser: with statements, labeled statements, hashbang lines, and destructuring patterns, con-structs the human generator does not produce, each exercising distinct branches in Rhino’s tokenizer and parser. The agent dis-covers these constructs by reading Rhino’s source and identifying token types that correspond to rarely-reached parser states. The ChocoPy result is surprising. Agent coverage is only marginally above the human baseline ( +2% ), despite the agent tar-geting features related to semantic validity in many of the gener-ators. The human generator maintains a live list of declared class names and selects a previously-declared class as the superclass for each new class definition, naturally producing inheritance hierar-chies by construction. The agent does encode type-aware gener-ation and propagates return types into function bodies, but hard-codes a fixed set of class name pairs and generates inheritance only in high-complexity code paths. We hypothesize that the human generator’s bounded design – limiting identifier pool size and AST depth – increases the probability of type-consistent programs by construction, without requiring explicit type tracking [57]. The BCEL result is an instructive failure case. All three agent configurations fall 54% below the human baseline. The human generator uses BCEL’s own org.apache.bcel.generic API to construct semantically valid class files from high-level abstractions, covering nearly every JVM opcode via InstructionFactory and producing class files that pass all three passes of BCEL’s bytecode verifier. The agent, by contrast, treats class file generation as a raw byte-stream encoding problem, manually writing magic numbers and constant pool entries, producing inputs that frequently fail early in the parser with a format exception. None of the agent configurations discover the high-level construction API despite it being present in the library source. 

Finding 1: Agent-synthesized generators achieve statistically significantly higher branch coverage than human-written gen-erators on 4 of 7 benchmarks. The BCEL exception highlights a gap in agent strategy: failing to discover and leverage the library’s own high-level construction API. 

Execution speed. Agent-synthesized generators tend to pro-duce more complex inputs than the human baseline, resulting in lower throughput. Across non-BCEL benchmarks, agent config-urations are 81% slower to 79% faster than the human generator, with a median slowdown of 32% . Rhino shows the highest variance (26–149 inputs/sec for Gentoo-L ): some repetitions synthesize a 

Table 2: Mean execution speed (inputs/sec ± std across five repetitions) for each technique and benchmark, reflecting the throughput cost of more complex generators.                                                                                         

> Benchmark Human Gentoo-Base Gentoo-L Gentoo-S bcel 91.5 ±21.7 594.9 ±3.4 583.9 ±27.3 593.7 ±3.4 bouncycastle 594.5 ±3.4 594.6 ±3.5 593.4 ±3.6 593.6 ±3.5 chocopy 250.6 ±10.0 104.1 ±12.8 124.1 ±45.9 108.2 ±57.5 closure 36.2 ±2.4 19.1 ±6.4 40.9 ±12.8 17.4 ±11.1 commons 126.9 ±64.2 29.3 ±22.2 84.2 ±63.4 23.5 ±20.0 gson 595.8 ±2.6 409.6 ±145.2 485.5 ±119.6 488.5 ±146.8 rhino 83.3 ±10.9 112.4 ±42.6 56.6 ±25.0 148.8 ±66.1

generator with a shallow recursion-depth limit and no guard on nested block generation, producing accidentally deep JavaScript programs that are slow to interpret. BCEL is the outlier in the op-posite direction: agent generators run at ∼590 inputs/sec versus 

∼92 for the human generator, since the human generator invokes BCEL’s own class-building API to construct real class file objects, which is considerably more expensive than the agent’s raw byte-writing approach. 

## 4.3 RQ2: Impact of Coverage Guidance 

Can agent-synthesized generators eliminate the need for cover-age guidance and mutation-based fuzzing? 

We evaluate each synthesized and human-written generator under two conditions: coverage-guided mutation-based fuzzing using the Zest algorithm, and random input generation with no mutation feedback. In both conditions, branch coverage is tracked over the three-hour campaign. Figure 7 shows the percentage improvement in final branch coverage of coverage-guided fuzzing over random sampling for Gentoo-S , Gentoo-L , and Gentoo-Base across all benchmarks. For all three agent configurations, coverage guidance never pro-duces a statistically significant improvement over random input generation on any benchmark, with average differences of −0.1% ,

+0.8% , and +2.0% for Gentoo-Base , Gentoo-S , and Gentoo-L 

respectively. By contrast, for the human-written generators, cover-age guidance yields a statistically significant improvement on all 7 benchmarks, with an average improvement of +40% (ranging from 

+3% on ChocoPy to +229% on Commons). This contrast has a natural explanation. Many of the human-written generators are relatively simple – naive byte sequences, grammar samplers, or shallow random programs – for which mu-tation and coverage feedback can meaningfully guide exploration toward structurally valid inputs. The Commons benchmark illus-trates this directly: the human generator produces purely random byte sequences, so coverage guidance yields a 229% improvement as the fuzzer evolves the corpus toward inputs that satisfy the BZip2 stream header ( BZh ), block magic bytes, and Huffman ta-ble structure needed to reach the decompressor’s inner logic. The agent-synthesized generator, by contrast, explicitly encodes this structure: it generates the BZh header, block magic, CRC fields, ran-domised flags, and Huffman coding tables from scratch, producing valid BZip2 streams on every invocation. When a generator already Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Vasudev Vikram and Rohan Padhye                

> // (Simplified) self is typed with the enclosing class name; // return value is a type-consistent literal.
> private void generateMethod(String className, String methodName) { String returnType = chooseType(random); sb.append("def ").append(methodName) .append("(self: ").append(className).append(") -> ") .append(returnType).append(":\n"); sb.append(" return ") .append(generateLiteralForType(random, returnType)).append("\n"); }
> private String generateLiteralForType(SourceOfRandomness random, String type) {↩→
> switch (type) {
> case "int": return String.valueOf(random.nextInt(-100, 100));
> case "bool": return random.nextBoolean() ? "True" : "False";
> case "str": return "\"" + generateSimpleString(random) + "\"";
> default :return "None"; }}

Figure 6: Simplified excerpt from a Gentoo-L agent-synthesized ChocoPy generator. The generator encodes ChocoPy type semantics directly: self is typed with the enclosing class name and return values are constrained to match the method’s declared return type. By always return-ing a type-consistent literal, the generator trades input di-versity for guaranteed well-typedness. Commons Compress 

> Gson
> Bouncy Castle
> ChocoPy
> BCEL
> Rhino
> Closure
> -10
> -1
> 0
> 1
> 10
> 100
> Coverage improvement of
> Zest over Random (%)
> Gentoo-S
> Gentoo-L
> Gentoo-Base
> Human

Figure 7: Percentage improvement in final branch coverage of coverage-guided fuzzing (Zest) over random sampling for each technique and benchmark. Dots above zero indicate that Zest helps; dots below zero indicate it hurts. Filled markers denote a statistically significant difference ( 𝑝 < 0.05 , MWU); hollow markers are not significant. 

encodes such domain-specific structure, coverage-guided mutation has little room to improve over purely random sampling from the same generator. Figure 6 shows an example from the agent-synthesized ChocoPy generator: methods are generated with typed self parameters, declared return types, and return values that are type-consistent by construction. Notably, the generator always returns a literal (e.g., an integer or boolean constant) rather than a more complex expression, trading input diversity for guaranteed type correctness – a conservative strategy focused on semantic validity that makes coverage guidance and mutation strategies less effective. 

Finding 2: Coverage guidance and mutation strategies are never statistically significantly beneficial for agent-synthesized gener-ators, but are significant for all human-written generators. Struc-tural and semantic logic encoded in agent generators makes coverage guidance and mutation largely unnecessary. 

## 4.4 RQ3: Impact of Predicate Feedback 

Does fine-grained predicate feedback improve coverage of agent-synthesized generators? 

Comparing final branch coverage across all three configurations (Figure 5), Gentoo-Base leads on 3 benchmarks, Gentoo-S on 3, and Gentoo-L on 1, with differences often within the variance across repetitions. This suggests that a well-prompted baseline agent can synthesize comparably strong generators without predi-cate guidance. To understand whether predicate feedback contributes within the synthesis process itself, we also examine how coverage evolves across agent iterations. For Gentoo-S and Gentoo-L , each time the agent invokes the fuzzing campaign to test its current generator, we checkpoint both the generator and the fuzzing results. We then measure branch coverage at each checkpoint relative to the first iteration to isolate the contribution of iterative refinement. Figure 8 shows this per-iteration coverage ratio for Gentoo-S (solid) and 

Gentoo-L (dashed) across all benchmarks. Coverage improves in 74% of runs for both Gentoo-S and 

Gentoo-L . Gentoo-S achieves a mean improvement of +18% (me-dian +12% ) over the first iteration, while Gentoo-L achieves a mean of +57% (median +11% ), with the higher mean driven by large gains on ChocoPy and BCEL where the initial generator is weak and predicate feedback guides the agent to add substantial new genera-tion logic. Most benchmarks show a monotone improvement trend, with coverage plateauing after two to three iterations as the agent exhausts the changes suggested by the predicate feedback. We do not observe monotonic increases in coverage across itera-tions on all benchmarks. In one such case, the Gentoo-S generator for Closure regresses in 3 of 5 repetitions: after observing zero cov-erage on the highest-dominance predicates, the agent attempts to increase the compilation success rate reported by Zest, simplifying the generator to produce shorter and more conservative JavaScript, which reduces input diversity and lowers coverage. This illustrates a limitation: predicate feedback may lead the agent to optimize in the wrong direction when the signal is ambiguous. The Commons Compress benchmark illustrates a successful re-finement. Between iteration 1 and iteration 2, Gentoo-S replaces four approximate strategy methods with six bit-precise methods en-coding specific BZip2 structures, and critically bounds the origPtr 

field by the actual data size, fixing an IOException that had blocked the decompressor’s inner logic. Coverage improves by 88% in a sin-gle refinement step. 

Finding 3: Predicate feedback improves generators in 74% of runs, but final branch coverage is broadly comparable across all Fuzzing with Agents? Generators Are All You Need Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

three configurations, suggesting predicate feedback is beneficial but not decisive compared to a well-prompted baseline agent. 

## 4.5 RQ4: LLM vs. Static Predicate Analysis 

How does LLM predicate analysis compare to static dominator analysis? 

As shown in Figure 5, Gentoo-S and Gentoo-L achieve broadly comparable final coverage, with Gentoo-S leading on 3 bench-marks and Gentoo-L on 1. Despite this similarity in outcome, the two approaches identify different predicates and reason about them differently. Static dominator analysis ranks predicates purely by how many CFG nodes they structurally dominate, without any notion of how hard it is for an input generator to satisfy each branch. The predi-cate coverage report provides a runtime measurement of this hard-ness after execution, but not before. The LLM, by contrast, reads the source code and reasons about both dominance and semantic hardness before execution of the generators, filtering out high-dominance predicates that are easy to satisfy and focusing on those that require non-trivial input structure. The Rhino benchmark illustrates this clearly. Static analysis ranks token-stream predicates at the top (dominance scores 628– 651), but these are trivially satisfied – over 10,000 inputs hit all branches since any sequence of characters exercises different token types. Gentoo-L instead targets parser-level predicates for state-ments, expressions, and function definitions (estimated dominance 100–200), correctly reasoning that reaching the parser requires syntactically structured JavaScript programs rather than arbitrary token sequences. 

Finding 4: Gentoo-S and Gentoo-L achieve comparable final coverage despite targeting different predicates. Static analysis ranks by structural dominance alone, while the LLM additionally reasons about semantic hardness – sometimes identifying hard-to-reach predicates that static analysis deprioritizes. 

## 5 RELATED WORK 

There has recently been a large body of work to use large language models for software testing tasks [24, 53, 58]. 

Automatic Fuzz Driver Synthesis. The problem of fuzz harness 

or fuzz driver generation bears similarity to our input generator synthesis task [ 9 , 26 ]. In fuzz driver generation, the goal is to take unstructured byte data provided by the fuzz tester, and use it to ex-ercise the program under test in a meaningful manner. UTopia [ 27 ]extracts fuzz drivers from unit tests, noting that some unit test assertions (e.g., checking null pointers) must be preserved to main-tain property validity. LLMs have also been applied to fuzz driver generation [ 67 ]. PromptFuzz [ 40 ] runs harnesses during synthe-sis and uses coverage information to select which functions to include in the next harness prompt. CKGFuzzer [ 62 ] introduces a code knowledge graph for better library understanding, and Prome-Fuzz [ 38 ] employs retrieval-augmented generation and an LLM-based bug analyzer. OSS-Fuzz-Gen [ 35 ] has successfully landed new fuzz harnesses in real open-source projects via Google’s OSS-Fuzz infrastructure. Stitch [ 21 ] takes a different approach, encoding API usage constraints as composable blocks that a fuzzer dynamically assembles at runtime, with a static type system governing object flow between blocks and a dynamically-checked typestate track-ing semantic constraints such as object state dependencies and cross-function preconditions. 

Large Language Models for Input Generation. Recently, re-searchers have developed methods of providing specific documen-tation as context to the LLM for the purpose of generating test inputs that exercise specific behavior. Fuzz4All [ 60 ] provides lan-guage standards to develop and autoprompting workflow to prompt LLMs to act as input generation and mutation engines and fuzz various compilers. DiffSpec [ 49 ] compiles historical bug data and typing rules from documentation to provide to LLMs in order to differentially test the wasm validator. Ackermann et al. [ 4] utilize LLMs to examine natural language format specifications to gen-erate strong seeds for a mutation-based fuzzing. Meng et al. [ 43 ]develop ChatAFL to enhance protocol fuzzing by enriching ini-tial seeds with specific LLM message outputs. FuzzGPT [ 18 ] and WhiteFox [ 63 ] prompt LLMs to synthesize Python programs to test deep-learning libraries and compilers. EvalPlus augments the HumanEval unit testing dataset by prompting the LLM to produce seed inputs and performing further type-based mutation [ 37 ]. While these approaches have been successful at improving upon exist-ing fuzzing baselines, Jiang et al. [ 28 ] detail limitations including insufficient input diversity and limited validity. LLM-based test generation is a closely related line of work. LLMs have been applied to generate unit tests [ 5, 10 , 50 , 54 ], co-generate code and tests interactively [ 31 ], and aid search-based unit test generation [ 33 ]. TestPilot [ 54 ] uses automated prompt refinement, enriching prompts with documentation, signatures, or error mes-sages when a generated test fails. LLMs have also been applied to property-based test generation [ 41 , 56 ], which shares with our work the goal of choosing input generation strategies that produce inputs rather than synthesizing individual test cases. 

LLM-Synthesized Input Generators. ELFuzz [ 15 ] and G 2Fuzz [ 68 ]are the most closely related works to Gentoo . ELFuzz uses an LLM-driven evolution loop to iteratively mutate generator code, guided by a coverage-range lattice (“fuzzer space”) that enables fine-grained comparison of which code regions each fuzzer vari-ant covers. G 2Fuzz synthesizes Python generators for non-textual binary formats and re-invokes the LLM when AFL++ stalls. Both approaches treat the LLM as a stateless code mutator: given a gen-erator, produce a better one. Gentoo differs in two key ways: it deploys an autonomous agent with terminal access that can compile, execute, and debug generators over multiple reasoning steps; and it grounds refinement in predicate-level feedback, directly telling the agent which high-impact program predicates its generator fails to satisfy. Neither ELFuzz nor G 2Fuzz focus their evaluation on agentic synthesis methods or investigate the impact of coverage guidance on the generators; both evaluate against traditional mutation-based fuzzers. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Vasudev Vikram and Rohan Padhye 1 2 3 4 5                       

> Agent iteration
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> 1.6
> 1.8
> 2.0
> Coverage relative to iter 1  Commons Compress
> Gentoo-S
> Gentoo-L 1234
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> 1.1
> 1.2
> Gson 12345
> 0.90
> 0.95
> 1.00
> 1.05
> 1.10
> Bouncy Castle 12345
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> ChocoPy 12345
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> 1.6
> 1.8
> 2.0
> 2.2
> BCEL 123456
> 1.0
> 1.1
> 1.2
> 1.3
> Rhino 1234
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> 1.1
> 1.2
> 1.3
> 1.4
> Closure

Figure 8: Branch coverage relative to iteration 1 over agent iterations for Gentoo-S (solid) and Gentoo-L (dashed). A value of 1.0 means no change from the first iteration; higher is better. Shading shows ±1 std across five repetitions. 

## 6 THREATS TO VALIDITY 

Construct Validity. We use branch coverage as the primary metric for evaluating generator quality. Branch coverage is a necessary but not sufficient condition for finding bugs: a generator that covers more code reaches more potential bug sites, but coverage alone does not guarantee fault detection. A second construct threat is the use of per-iteration coverage improvement as a proxy for the utility of predicate feedback. An agent may improve coverage between iterations for reasons unrelated to predicate feedback, for example by restructuring generation logic based on inspecting generated inputs, reading source code more carefully, or simply exploring a different region of the generator design space. We cannot fully attribute these improvements to predicate feedback specifically. 

Internal Validity. A threat to internal validity is the non-determinism inherent in both LLM generation and coverage-guided fuzzing. LLM outputs vary across runs even for the same prompt, and fuzzing campaigns are randomized. We mitigate this by running each configuration five times and reporting aggregate statistics. A second threat is that the LLM agent we use (Claude) may have been exposed to the source code of the libraries under test during pretraining, potentially giving it an advantage over a truly black-box baseline. We cannot fully rule out this possibility, but we note that any memorized knowledge must be translated into executable generation logic to be useful. Upon manually investigating a sample of the agent-synthesized generators, we note that they do not share any exact similarity in generation logic compared to the human-written generators. Finally, our evaluation measures coverage at the end of a fixed-time fuzzing campaign; the relative ordering of configurations could differ under longer or shorter time budgets. 

External Validity. Our evaluation targets Java libraries fuzzed via the JQF framework. Our conclusions may not generalize to programs written in other languages or fuzzed with other tools such as AFL [ 66 ] or libFuzzer [ 3], where different generator in-terfaces and instrumentation mechanisms apply. Additionally, our benchmark suite covers 7 libraries across diverse input formats; programs with very large or dynamically loaded codebases may be harder to analyze statically. Our evaluation uses Claude 4.5 Opus as the underlying model with the Claude Agent SDK scaffolding; results may differ with other models, agent frameworks, or prompt strategies, and we cannot claim that our findings generalize to all LLM-based synthesis approaches. 

## 7 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 

Generators are all you need. Our results show that coverage-guided mutation contributes only marginally on top of agent-synthesized generators, and never significantly so. When a genera-tor encodes the target’s structural and semantic constraints directly, the fuzzing loop becomes a simple execution harness. This suggests a shift in focus from fuzzer engineering to generator synthesis: in-vesting in better generators may be more productive than investing in smarter mutation strategies or power schedules. 

Agents and application-specific analysis. Our results offer a pos-itive example of a broader trend: coding agents constructing application-specific analyses tailored to a given target, rather than applying a fixed general-purpose tool uniformly. For each library, the agent reads the source, reasons about which input constraints matter for that specific target, and writes generation logic that encodes those constraints directly. This contrasts with traditional approaches that apply the same fuzzer, symbolic executor, or static analyzer to every target and rely on the tool to bridge the gap to application-specific behavior. We believe this paradigm, agents as constructors of bespoke per-target analyses, is broadly applica-ble beyond input generation, and represents a promising direction for automating software engineering tasks that have historically resisted general-purpose tooling. 

The future of agents and generator-based fuzzing. Today’s coding agents primarily choose unit testing as their default behavior as a means of validating correctness. We hope to see a shift toward higher-scale automated testing techniques such as generator-based fuzzing, where the agent’s ability to synthesize domain-specific Fuzzing with Agents? Generators Are All You Need Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

input generators on the fly unlocks a different scale of test-input exploration. As agents become more capable, the barrier to building such generators will continue to fall, potentially making generator-based fuzzing a practical first-class option for automated software validation. 

## 8 DATA AVAILABILITY 

The source code of Gentoo , the synthesized input generators for all benchmarks, execution results, and scripts from our evaluation are available on Zenodo at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19138370. 

## 9 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation grant CCF-2120955 and an Amazon Research Award. 

## REFERENCES 

[1] [n. d.]. WALA: T.J. Watson Libraries for Analysis. https://github.com/wala/wala. Accessed 2025. [2] [n. d.]. junit-quickcheck-generator. https://pholser.github.io/junit-quickcheck/ site/1.0/usage/other-types.html. Accessed: 2024-10-31. [3] [n. d.]. libFuzzer – a library for coverage-guided fuzz testing. https://llvm.org/ docs/LibFuzzer.html. Accessed: 2021-08-31. [4] Joshua Ackerman and George Cybenko. 2023. Large language models for fuzzing parsers (registered report). In Proceedings of the 2nd International Fuzzing Work-shop . 31–38. [5] Nadia Alshahwan, Jubin Chheda, Anastasia Finegenova, Beliz Gokkaya, Mark Harman, Inna Harper, Alexandru Marginean, Shubho Sengupta, and Eddy Wang. 2024. Automated unit test improvement using large language models at meta. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09171 (2024). [6] Anthropic. [n. d.]. Claude Agent SDK. https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/agent-sdk/overview. Accessed 2025. [7] Cornelius Aschermann, Sergej Schumilo, Tim Blazytko, Robert Gawlik, and Thorsten Holz. 2019. REDQUEEN: Fuzzing with Input-to-State Correspondence.. In NDSS , Vol. 19. 1–15. https://doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2019.23371 [8] Jinsheng Ba and Manuel Rigger. 2023. Testing database engines via query plan guidance. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2060–2071. [9] Domagoj Babić, Stefan Bucur, Yaohui Chen, Franjo Ivančić, Tim King, Markus Kusano, Caroline Lemieux, László Szekeres, and Wei Wang. 2019. Fudge: fuzz driver generation at scale. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 975–985. [10] Patrick Bareiß, Beatriz Souza, Marcelo d’Amorim, and Michael Pradel. 2022. Code generation tools (almost) for free? a study of few-shot, pre-trained language models on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01335 (2022). [11] Marcel Böhme, Van-Thuan Pham, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2016. Coverage-based Greybox Fuzzing as Markov Chain. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) . 1032–1043. https: //doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978428 [12] Marcel Böhme, Van-Thuan Pham, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2017. Coverage-based greybox fuzzing as markov chain. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 

45, 5 (2017), 489–506. [13] Marcel Böhme, László Szekeres, and Jonathan Metzman. 2022. On the Reliability of Coverage-Based Fuzzer Benchmarking. In 44th IEEE/ACM International Confer-ence on Software Engineering (ICSE’22) . https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510230 to appear. [14] Sang Kil Cha, Maverick Woo, and David Brumley. 2015. Program-adaptive mutational fuzzing. In 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy . IEEE, 725– 741. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2015.50 [15] Chuyang Chen and Brendan Dolan-Gavitt. 2025. ELFuzz: Efficient Input Gen-eration via LLM-driven Synthesis Over Fuzzer Space. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) . 6279–6298. [16] Peng Chen and Hao Chen. 2018. Angora: Efficient fuzzing by principled search. In 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 711–725. https: //doi.org/10.1109/SP.2018.00046 [17] Koen Claessen and John Hughes. 2000. QuickCheck: a lightweight tool for random testing of Haskell programs. In Proceedings of the fifth ACM SIGPLAN international conference on Functional programming . 268–279. [18] Yinlin Deng, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Chenyuan Yang, Shizhuo Dylan Zhang, Shujing Yang, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Large language models are edge-case fuzzers: Testing deep learning libraries via fuzzgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02014 (2023). [19] Zhen Yu Ding and Claire Le Goues. 2021. An Empirical Study of OSS-Fuzz Bugs. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 18th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) . IEEE, IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 131–142. https: //doi.org/10.1109/MSR52588.2021.00026 [20] Shuitao Gan, Chao Zhang, Peng Chen, Bodong Zhao, Xiaojun Qin, Dong Wu, and Zuoning Chen. 2020. GREYONE: Data flow sensitive fuzzing. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20) . 2577–2594. https://doi.org/10.5555/ 3489212.3489357 [21] Harrison Green, Fraser Brown, and Claire Le Goues. 2026. Automatic, Expressive, and Scalable Fuzzing with Stitching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.18689 (2026). [22] Jiale Guo, Suizhi Huang, Mei Li, Dong Huang, Xingsheng Chen, Regina Zhang, Zhijiang Guo, Han Yu, Siu-Ming Yiu, Pietro Lio, and Kwok-Yan Lam. 2025. A Comprehensive Survey on Benchmarks and Solutions in Software Engineering of LLM-Empowered Agentic System. arXiv:2510.09721 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/ abs/2510.09721 [23] Paul Holser. [n. d.]. junit-quickcheck: Property-based testing, JUnit-style. https: //github.com/pholser/junit-quickcheck. Accessed: 2021-08-31. [24] Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Yue Liu, Zhou Yang, Kailong Wang, Li Li, Xiapu Luo, David Lo, John Grundy, and Haoyu Wang. 2023. Large language models for software engineering: A systematic literature review. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (2023). [25] Katherine Hough and Jonathan Bell. 2024. Crossover in Parametric Fuzzing. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering .1–12. [26] Kyriakos K Ispoglou, Daniel Austin, Vishwath Mohan, and Mathias Payer. 2020. Fuzzgen: Automatic fuzzer generation. In Proceedings of the 29th USENIX Confer-ence on Security Symposium . 2271–2287. [27] B. Jeong, J. Jang, H. Yi, J. Moon, J. Kim, I. Jeon, T. Kim, W. Shim, and Y. Hwang. 2023. UTOPIA: Automatic Generation of Fuzz Driver using Unit Tests. In 2023 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) (SP) . IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 746–762. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP46215.2023.00043 [28] Yu Jiang, Jie Liang, Fuchen Ma, Yuanliang Chen, Chijin Zhou, Yuheng Shen, Zhiy-ong Wu, Jingzhou Fu, Mingzhe Wang, Shanshan Li, and Quan Zhang. 2024. When Fuzzing Meets LLMs: Challenges and Opportunities. In Companion Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering 

(Porto de Galinhas, Brazil) (FSE 2024) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 492–496. https://doi.org/10.1145/3663529.3663784 [29] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 (2023). [30] George Klees, Andrew Ruef, Benji Cooper, Shiyi Wei, and Michael Hicks. 2018. Evaluating fuzz testing. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 2123–2138. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3243734.3243804 [31] Shuvendu Lahiri, Aaditya Naik, Georgios Sakkas, Piali Choudhury, Curtis von Veh, Madan Musuvathi, Jeevana Priya Inala, Chenglong Wang, and Jianfeng Gao. 2022. Interactive Code Generation via Test-Driven User-Intent Formalization. arXiv. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/interactive-code-generation-via-test-driven-user-intent-formalization/ [32] Leonidas Lampropoulos, Michael Hicks, and Benjamin C Pierce. 2019. Coverage guided, property based testing. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Lan-guages 3, OOPSLA, Article 181 (Oct. 2019), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3360607 [33] Caroline Lemieux, Jeevana Priya Inala, Shuvendu K Lahiri, and Siddhartha Sen. 2023. CODAMOSA: Escaping Coverage Plateaus in Test Generation with Pre-trained Large Language Models. In 45th International Conference on Software Engineering, ser. ICSE .[34] Caroline Lemieux and Koushik Sen. 2018. Fairfuzz: A targeted mutation strategy for increasing greybox fuzz testing coverage. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering . 475–485. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3238147.3238176 [35] Dongge Liu, Jonathan Metzman, and Oliver Chang. 2023. Open Source In-sights. https://security.googleblog.com/2023/08/ai-powered-fuzzing-breaking-bug-hunting.html. Retrieved February 27, 2024. [36] Junwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, Xin Peng, Zhenpeng Chen, Lingming Zhang, and Yiling Lou. 2025. Large Language Model-Based Agents for Software Engineering: A Survey. arXiv:2409.02977 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02977 [37] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Is your code generated by chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 

36 (2024). [38] Yuwei Liu, Junquan Deng, Xiangkun Jia, Yanhao Wang, Minghua Wang, Lin Huang, Tao Wei, and Purui Su. 2025. PromeFuzz: A Knowledge-Driven Approach to Fuzzing Harness Generation with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security .1559–1573. [39] Chenyang Lyu, Shouling Ji, Chao Zhang, Yuwei Li, Wei-Han Lee, Yu Song, and Raheem Beyah. 2019. MOPT: Optimized mutation scheduling for fuzzers. In 28th Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Vasudev Vikram and Rohan Padhye 

USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19) . 1949–1966. https://doi.org/10. 5555/3361338.3361473 [40] Yunlong Lyu, Yuxuan Xie, Peng Chen, and Hao Chen. 2023. Prompt Fuzzing for Fuzz Driver Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.17677 (2023). [41] Muhammad Maaz, Liam DeVoe, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, and Nicholas Carlini. 2025. Agentic Property-Based Testing: Finding Bugs Across the Python Ecosystem. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09907 (2025). [42] Valentin Jean Marie Manès, HyungSeok Han, Choongwoo Han, Sang Kil Cha, Manuel Egele, Edward J Schwartz, and Maverick Woo. 2019. The art, science, and engineering of fuzzing: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 

(2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2019.2946563 [43] Ruijie Meng, Martin Mirchev, Marcel Böhme, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. Large language model guided protocol fuzzing. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) .[44] Barton P. Miller, Louis Fredriksen, and Bryan So. 1990. An Empirical Study of the Reliability of UNIX Utilities. Commun. ACM 33, 12 (dec 1990), 32–44. https://doi.org/10.1145/96267.96279 [45] Hoang Lam Nguyen and Lars Grunske. 2022. Bedivfuzz: Integrating behavioral diversity into generator-based fuzzing. In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering . 249–261. [46] Rohan Padhye, Caroline Lemieux, and Koushik Sen. 2019. JQF: Coverage-guided Property-based Testing in Java. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT In-ternational Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Beijing, China) (IS-STA’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 398–401. https://doi.org/10.1145/3293882.3339002 [47] Rohan Padhye, Caroline Lemieux, Koushik Sen, Mike Papadakis, and Yves Le Traon. 2019. Semantic Fuzzing with Zest. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIG-SOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Beijing, China) 

(ISSTA 2019) . ACM, 329–340. https://doi.org/10.1145/3293882.3330576 [48] Rohan Padhye, Koushik Sen, and Paul N. Hilfinger. 2019. ChocoPy: A Program-ming Language for Compilers Courses. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on SPLASH-E (Athens, Greece) (SPLASH-E 2019) . Association for Computing Machinery, 41–45. https://doi.org/10.1145/3358711.3361627 [49] Nikitha Rao, Elizabeth Gilbert, Tahina Ramananandro, Nikhil Swamy, Claire Le Goues, and Sarah Fakhoury. 2024. DiffSpec: Differential Testing with LLMs using Natural Language Specifications and Code Artifacts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04249 (2024). [50] Nikitha Rao, Kush Jain, Uri Alon, Claire Le Goues, and Vincent J Hellendoorn. 2023. CAT-LM training language models on aligned code and tests. In 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) .IEEE, 409–420. [51] Alexandre Rebert, Sang Kil Cha, Thanassis Avgerinos, Jonathan Foote, David Warren, Gustavo Grieco, and David Brumley. 2014. Optimizing seed selection for fuzzing. In 23rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 14) . 861–875. https://doi.org/10.5555/2671225.2671280 [52] John Regehr, Yang Chen, Pascal Cuoq, Eric Eide, Chucky Ellison, and Xuejun Yang. 2012. Test-Case Reduction for C Compiler Bugs. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation 

(Beijing, China) (PLDI ’12) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 335–346. https://doi.org/10.1145/2254064.2254104 [53] Max Schäfer, Sarah Nadi, Aryaz Eghbali, and Frank Tip. 2023. An empirical evaluation of using large language models for automated unit test generation. 

IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2023). [54] Max Schäfer, Sarah Nadi, Aryaz Eghbali, and Frank Tip. 2023. Adaptive Test Generation Using a Large Language Model. arXiv:2302.06527 [cs.SE] [55] Vasudev Vikram, Isabella Laybourn, Ao Li, Nicole Nair, Kelton OBrien, Rafaello Sanna, and Rohan Padhye. 2023. Guiding Greybox Fuzzing with Mutation Testing. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Test-ing and Analysis (, Seattle, WA, USA,) (ISSTA 2023) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 929–941. https://doi.org/10.1145/3597926.3598107 [56] Vasudev Vikram, Caroline Lemieux, Joshua Sunshine, and Rohan Padhye. 2023. Can large language models write good property-based tests? arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04346 (2023). [57] Vasudev Vikram, Rohan Padhye, and Koushik Sen. 2021. Growing A Test Corpus with Bonsai Fuzzing. In 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2021, Madrid, Spain, 22-30 May 2021 . IEEE, 723–735. https: //doi.org/10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00072 [58] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, et al . 2024. OpenHands: An Open Platform for AI Software Developers as Generalist Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741 (2024). [59] Mingyuan Wu, Ling Jiang, Jiahong Xiang, Yanwei Huang, Heming Cui, Lingming Zhang, and Yuqun Zhang. 2022. One Fuzzing Strategy to Rule Them All. In Pro-ceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania) (ICSE ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1634–1645. https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510174 [60] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Matteo Paltenghi, Jia Le Tian, Michael Pradel, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Fuzz4all: Universal fuzzing with large language models. Proc. IEEE/ACM ICSE (2024). [61] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Zhe Wang, Yan Yang, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. 2025. Live-SWE-agent: Can Software Engineering Agents Self-Evolve on the Fly? arXiv:2511.13646 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.13646 [62] Hanxiang Xu, Wei Ma, Ting Zhou, Yanjie Zhao, Kai Chen, Qiang Hu, Yang Liu, and Haoyu Wang. 2024. CKGFuzzer: LLM-Based Fuzz Driver Generation Enhanced By Code Knowledge Graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11532 (2024). [63] Chenyuan Yang, Yinlin Deng, Runyu Lu, Jiayi Yao, Jiawei Liu, Reyhaneh Jab-barvand, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. WhiteFox: White-Box Compiler Fuzzing Empowered by Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15991 (2023). [64] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15793 (2024). [65] Xuejun Yang, Yang Chen, Eric Eide, and John Regehr. 2011. Finding and Un-derstanding Bugs in C Compilers. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI ’11) .[66] Michal Zalewski. 2014. American Fuzzy Lop. https://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/. Accessed February 11, 2022. [67] Cen Zhang, Mingqiang Bai, Yaowen Zheng, Yeting Li, Xiaofei Xie, Yuekang Li, Wei Ma, Limin Sun, and Yang Liu. 2023. Understanding large language model based fuzz driver generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12469 (2023). [68] Kunpeng Zhang, Zongjie Li, Daoyuan Wu, Shuai Wang, and Xin Xia. 2025. Low-Cost and Comprehensive Non-textual Input Fuzzing with LLM-Synthesized Input Generators. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) . 6999–7018.