Title: WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.06367v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Apr 2026 00:11:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# WEB SP-E VAL : E VALUATING WEB AGENTS ON WEBSITE 

# SECURITY AND PRIVACY TASKS 

Guruprasad Viswanathan Ramesh, Asmit Nayak, Basieem Siddique, Kassem Fawaz 

University of Wisconsin-Madison 

viswanathanr@wisc.edu , anayak6@wisc.edu , bsiddique@wisc.edu , kfawaz@wisc.edu 

## ABSTRACT 

Web agents automate browser tasks, ranging from simple form completion to complex workflows like ordering groceries. While current benchmarks evaluate general-purpose performance (e.g., We-bArena) or safety against malicious actions (e.g., SafeArena), no existing framework assesses an agent’s ability to successfully execute user-facing website security and privacy tasks, such as manag-ing cookie preferences, configuring privacy-sensitive account settings, or revoking inactive sessions. To address this gap, we introduce WebSP-Eval , an evaluation framework for measuring web agent performance on website security and privacy tasks. WebSP-Eval comprises 1) a manually crafted task dataset of 200 task instances across 28 websites; 2) a robust agentic system supporting account and initial state management across runs using a custom Google Chrome extension; and 3) an auto-mated evaluator. We evaluate a total of 8 web agent instantiations using state-of-the-art multimodal large language models, conducting a fine-grained analysis across websites, task categories, and UI elements. Our evaluation reveals that current models suffer from limited autonomous exploration capabilities to reliably solve website security and privacy tasks, and struggle with specific task cat-egories and websites. Crucially, we identify stateful UI elements such as toggles and checkboxes are a primary reason for agent failure, failing at a rate of more than 45% in tasks containing these elements across many models. 

## 1 Introduction 

Web agents [33, 18, 35, 36] are powerful tools that help in automating mundane tasks on the web. Recently, LLM-powered web agents (commonly referred to also as browser-use agents) have gained significant traction offering more flexible web interactions on the web [53, 19]. Modern browsers such as Perplexity’s Comet [36] and Open AI’s At-las [34] incorporate web agents into their user-experience. These agents allow users to delegate repetitive tasks such as finding the cheapest flight, ordering weekly groceries, or listing in a code repository with a specific label [53]. Web agents act on textual user instructions for the task and leverage contextual information of the operating environ-ment such as screenshots and (or) DOM trees to understand the page’s current state and execute actions using web automation frameworks like Selenium [41], Playwright [29], etc. While the utility of these agents is rapidly expanding, their autonomous nature necessitates rigorous evaluations, including security- and privacy-based ones. Standard web agent benchmarks are primarily general-purpose, focusing heavily on information-retrieval tasks (e.g., WebArena [53] and WebVoyager [19]). Given the sensitive data these agents process, recent benchmarks also evaluate their safety and security (SafeArena [47], ST-WebAgentBench [24]) and assess their propensity to leak private information during routine tasks (PrivacyLens [43], PrivaCI-Bench [25]). However existing benchmarks fail to evaluate how web agents handle website security and privacy decisions that users make daily. A few examples include managing cookies, updating data sharing permissions, and revoking older sessions. It is critical to assess web agents on these tasks as they might not only be explicitly prompted to make such decisions by the user, but also might encounter many of these tasks during live exploration of websites while performing other tasks. As agents advance toward making persona-driven decisions on behalf of users, their ability 

> Code and data will be released soon
> arXiv:2604.06367v1 [cs.CR] 7 Apr 2026

WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks to safely navigate these settings becomes paramount [38]. Deploying these systems without rigorous website security and privacy tasks evaluation is risky, as even a single erroneous action by an agent could inadvertently weaken a user’s overall account security or expose their private data. Performing a faithful evaluation of web agents on website security and privacy tasks requires a consistent initial state that can be precisely controlled across different evaluation runs. But as these tasks are performed on live websites where states are maintained on the server-side, an evaluator would require a robust account and state management setup to faithfully evaluate their models. A simple solution would be to use a new sock puppet account for each run, but this does not scale. Addressing not just this infrastructural challenge but also the lack of a standard dataset, we introduce WebSP-Eval , an evaluation framework to assess web agents on website security and privacy tasks . It comprises three modules: 1) a manually crafted dataset of 200 task instances representing 138 tasks across 28 websites; 2) an agentic system built upon WebVoyager [19], that solves the infrastructural challenge of account state and session management using a custom Google Chrome extension; and 3) an automated judge based on ensemble of three state-of-the-art models to accurately measure task success. Task instances in our dataset are paired with one or multiple initial states of the websites that allow consistent evaluation of different models. And although we build our agentic implementation over WebVoyager, we make many changes to system from extending the action space to improving its features, thereby supporting the web agent to perform the tasks in our dataset on live websites (refer to Section 3.2.2). Using our framework we instantiate our agentic system with eight state-of-the-art multimodal large language mod-els (MLLMs), evaluating trajectories with our automated judge. Our evaluation addresses three research questions: 1) RQ1: Can agents autonomously execute tasks, and how does explicit navigational instruction impact performance? 2) RQ2: How does performance vary across different websites and task categories? 3) RQ3: How do specific UI elements and their initial states impact agent success? We find that while top-tier models like Gemini-3-Pro perform reliably well (achieving an 83% success rate with navigation and 76.5% without), forcing autonomous exploration causes significant performance degradation across all models. Smaller models suffer the most, with Gemini-2.5-Flash experiencing an 11.5% drop in success rate without navigation. Furthermore, our analysis reveals that agent performance is highly sensitive to website-specific UI layouts and task categories. Lastly, our fine-grained breakdown of agent performance by UI elements related to a task reveals that while reliably navigate using standard links and buttons, they fail significantly on stateful elements, with Gemini-2.5-Flash explicitly failing in 46.9% of toggle-related tasks. We also notice that there is a strong bias from the models to take actions even when the initial state matches the required state according to the task. Our major contributions are three-fold: 1) A Novel Benchmark: We introduce WebSP-Eval , the first evaluation dataset dedicated specifically to website security and privacy tasks. 2) A Robust Agentic Framework: We significantly extend WebVoyager [19] with more capabilities and a custom Google Chrome extension that enables account and initial state management for faithful live-web evaluation. 3) Extensive Empirical Analysis: We benchmark eight state-of-the-art models, uncovering critical vulnerabilities in autonomous exploration and exposing a severe lack of conditional state comprehension in modern web agents. 

## 2 Background and Related Work 

In this section, we provide an overview of web agents and introduce the notation used here after in the paper, review evaluation benchmarks and open-source frameworks for web agent implementations, and discuss evaluation method-ologies for automated evaluation of web agents. 

2.1 Web Agents 

Web agents [33, 53, 19], also commonly referred to Browser-use agents, enable dynamic and autonomous interaction within web environments. Unlike traditional web scrapers that are brittle to changing website structure, these agents attempt to mimic human behavior, i.e., they consider the current state of a website, reason about its content, and execute actions through the page’s interactable elements. At a high level, these agents comprise three components (Fig. 1): the user interface (UI), browser automation frameworks for actuation, and backbone models for reasoning. Web agents rely on natural prompt P to accept user instruction to perform a task T on a website W (e.g., “Disable all possible cookies for the website shein.com .”) [9]. The agent accepts P , generates an execution plan, and executes the relevant actions. As the agent operates, the UI provides real-time transparency, either by keeping the browser instance in the foreground or by displaying execution logs, screenshots of the agent’s current view, or a stream of 2WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

Figure 1: A high-level overview of a web agent consisting of a backbone model and an automation framework to execute actions based on the input prompt, previous actions, and environmental feedback. “thoughts” explaining the agent’s next move. The UI also allows the user to intervene within the execution flow to resolve ambiguities and make decisions that the agent cannot make on its own. The automation framework (e.g., Playwright [29], Puppeteer [17], Selenium [41]) acts as the interface to the environ-ment E, responsible for the agent’s perception and actuation. At time step t, it captures a representation of the web page to generate an observation ot ∈ O . This observation space includes the Document Object Model (DOM), the Accessibility Tree, and visual screenshots, and is fed to the backbone model MA.The backbone model MA, typically an MMLM [44, 12, 26], provides the agent’s reasoning capability. At time step t,

MA receives the context ct, which consists of the user instruction P , the history of past actions and observations, and the current observation: ct = ( P, o 1, a 1, . . . , a t−1, o t−1, o t). The model analyzes ct to map the spatial and semantic understanding of the website to a specific operation, producing an action at ∈ A such that at = M (ct). Once the model decides on an action at, the automation framework executes it within the environment E. The action at yields the next subsequent observation ot+1 = E(ot, a t). This cycle continues until MA generates a termination action at step Tf inal or a maximum step count Tmax is reached. The set of the actions along with the environmental changes is referred to as the trajectory of the agent. Actions at correspond to specific browser events (e.g., scroll to page footer , click("manage cookies") ,

click("marketing cookies switch") ) required to fulfill the task. Crucially, some actions change the underlying configuration of a website W , altering its state at step t, i.e., St. For example, if St represents a configuration where marketing cookies are active, the action at transitions the environment to St+1 , where the setting is deactivated in accordance with the instruction P . Thus, ensuring a uniform initial state S0 is essential for a faithful evaluation across runs. 

2.2 Web Agent Benchmarks 

Web Agents are predominantly evaluated on general-purpose benchmarks comprising information-retrieval tasks. Prominent examples include WebShop [51], Mind2Web [9], WebArena [53], WebVoyager [19], WorkArena [10] & WorkArena++ [4], and AssistantBench [52]. Since web agents often process sensitive data, complementary bench-marks such as SafeArena [47] and ST-WebAgentBench [24] include safety- and security-oriented evaluations. Sim-ilarly, PrivacyLens [43] and PrivaCI-Bench [25] assess whether models leak sensitive information while perform-ing general-purpose tasks, such as sending emails within a defined task context. An important distinction across these benchmarks is their execution environment, either with sandboxed website snapshots [9, 53, 47, 4] or live web-sites [19, 52]. 3WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

Figure 2: Modules of the WebSP-Eval evaluation framework: 1) Task Curation – Curation of a dataset consisting of website security and privacy tasks across websites. 2) Agent Instantiation – A novel web agent deployment supporting account and state management, utilizing an MLLM and a Selenium driven backbone to execute actions 3) Automated Verification – An automated Vision Language Model-based judge to assess agent failure across five categories. In contrast to these existing benchmarks, the security and privacy tasks in our dataset require configuring explicit website settings by interacting with stateful UI elements such as checkboxes and toggles. Thus, agents make active state changes on live websites tied to user accounts, and faithfully evaluating their performance necessitates a strictly controlled and consistent initial state across all runs. 

2.3 Web Agent Frameworks 

Several LLM-powered web agent frameworks have been proposed to facilitate web automation. These frameworks vary significantly in their design and operation. WebVoyager [19] uses an end-to-end multimodal architecture to process visual and textual inputs for real-world interactions. WebArena [53], on the other hand, provides a self-hostable, realistic browser environment with fully functional websites across four domains. AgentLab, utilizing BrowserGym [6], standardizes evaluation by unifying diverse benchmarks under a gym-like interface for scalable testing and analysis. Finally, CowPilot [20] introduces a collaborative paradigm, allowing users to pause, override, or resume agent-proposed actions at any point during execution. Frameworks also differ on the usage of the web automation tool to execute actions. Webvoyager uses Selenium [41], whereas others use Playwright [29]. In our work we utilize WebVoyager [19] as the foundational framework, prioritizing its Selenium-based architecture over common alternatives that utilize Playwright[29]. While Playwright is a powerful modern tool, it is primarily optimized for JavaScript and TypeScript environments. In contrast, Selenium provides an extensive and highly cus-tomizable ecosystem with the Python. By leveraging this compatibility, we ensure that agents utilizing our framework can interact with complex web environments while remaining extensible for the broader Python-based privacy research community. We detail all the improvements and changes we made to WebVoyager in Section 3. 

## 3 WebSP-Eval Framework 

We introduce an evaluation framework, WebSP-Eval , to analyze the performance of web agents on website security and privacy tasks. Our framework comprises three modules (as shown in Fig. 3) – Task Curation , Agent Instantiation ,and Automated Verification .

3.1 Task Curation 

Modern website design is influenced by a variety of components, including evolving frontend libraries, CSS specifi-cations, and developer-specific implementation preferences [21, 49]. Even for standard security and privacy controls associated with user accounts, website interfaces vary significantly in design and menu structure depending on whether the website uses external libraries or creates its own in-house libraries. A representative example can be a cookie no-tice, which although standardized has varied implementations. To capture this heterogeneity, in this module, we curate a dataset of website security and privacy tasks consisting of diverse popular websites representing different categories. To meet this diversity requirement, we obtain the top 5,000 websites from the Tranco list [37] and categorize them using Trellix TrustedSource [46] service. We prioritize websites from WebVoyager [19] that contain the represen-tative tasks for our purpose, while also supplementing other popular websites from Tranco. We choose categories that support simple user account creation without Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA), avoiding sensitive categories such as Finance/Banking in Trellix that require sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (PII) or complex identity verification. 4WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

Category Websites 

Education/Reference Coursera, Duolingo, Goodreads, Moodle, Wolfram Entertainment & Games Steam, Twitch, Wattpad Travel Airbnb, AllRecipes, OpenStreetMap Sports Goal General News AlJazeera, BBC, USAToday Online Shopping Amazon, IKEA, Shein Social Networking Pinterest, Quora, Reddit, OldReddit Interactive Web Applications Grammarly Technology & Business Docker, GitHub, GoogleAdCenter, Grammarly, HuggingFace, NVIDIA Table 1: The list of websites in the dataset of WebSP-Eval categorized according to Trellix TrustedSource [46]. Next, two of the authors visit the top 50 websites in the list and other websites from sparsely represented categories not in the top50. The authors inspect these websites and identify representative website security and privacy tasks based on established cybersecurity guidelines issued by governmental agencies, including the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) in the UK [31], and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) [32] and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) [11] in the US. Unlike the aforementioned existing benchmark involving web agents performing general-purpose tasks [53, 19, 47], a typical website security and privacy tasks involves modifying the website’s state from S0, its initial state, to Sf inal ,wherein St represents the state of the website at step t. Although the desired final state Sf inal for a task T is always the same, the actions to achieve Sf inal are different, depending on S0. For example, let’s consider a task requiring disabling marketing cookies; an agent should take no action if the cookies are already inactive in S0, however, the agent must execute specific clicks to disable these cookies if active. To account for such variability, we rigorously define S0 for every task. Each task in our task dataset DT is composed of – 1) a user query P representing a task T , and 2) a consistent initial State S0 of W with respect to T . For tasks with binary settings (such as toggles), we include two possible states: ON and OFF. For multi-choice settings (such as radio buttons), we initialize S0 to the least-private or least-secure setting by default. Therefore, some tasks in our dataset are paired with multiple initial states S0. We refer to these prompt-state pair as an instance in our dataset. This process yields a total of 200 instances, representing 138 distinct website security and privacy tasks across 28 websites and 7 categories (Table 1). Notably, our dataset covers significantly more websites than standard benchmarks such as WebVoyager (15 websites) and WebArena (4 self-hosted websites). To evaluate each agent fairly, we must ensure consistent S0. A trivial solution to ensure consistency would be to create a fresh user account for each evaluation run of an agent. However, this approach is not scalable. Thus, we enable a consistent initial state S0 with the help of a browser extension developed in-house (as detailed in Section 3.2). We provide more details of our dataset in Table 14 

3.2 Agent Instantiation 

The second module in WebSP-Eval is Agent Instantiation. Here, we develop a system to execute instances from our dataset by building upon the base implementation logic and action space of WebVoyager [19]. WebVoyager takes a user prompt P as input, along with context ct comprising 1) current and past visual screenshots grounded with Set of Marks (SoM) [50] 2) textual information of the interactive elements on page, and 3) text-based action history of the agent. The LLM decides an action at based on P and ct that is executed based on a Selenium-based browser automation framework [41]. The action space A comprises actions like ‘ CLICK ’, ‘ SCROLL ’, ‘ TYPE ’, and ‘ANSWER ’ (indicates model’s completion). 5WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks We specifically enhance the action space to cover more actions typically performed by a real user and add Account and State Management controls to create a system that executes instances in our dataset in a fully automated manner in the following steps: 1) Authentication: If the task requires an authenticated session, our system automatically logs in to the website. 2) State Initialization: The system then sets the desired initial state S0 for the instance. 3) Task Execution: The agent interacts with the environment using Selenium as the interface and performs actions necessary to execute the task. 

3.2.1 Account and State Management 

The WebVoyager benchmark [19] comprises information general-purpose tasks within stateless, unauthenticated ses-sions. However, all tasks in our dataset require a consistent initial state, and most require authenticated user accounts on a website. To address this requirement, we develop an account and state management component that operates independent of the LLM backbone within the agent. These components handle the first two steps of our instance execution system. Our system integrates persistent Chrome profiles into Selenium sessions, using a manual, pre-authenticated Google account to perform cross-site logins (via OAuth). We create a copy of this base profile to execute the three-step pro-cess described above. Furthermore, to enforce initial states ( S0) and support automated authentication without Google OAuth, we implement a record-and-replay mechanism [3]. This approach prevents account logouts across evaluation runs and ensures reproducible S0. Using our in-house browser extension, we record execution traces—sequences of user actions and DOM attributes (e.g., XPaths)—which are subsequently replayed via Selenium. This setup en-sures consistent state management across agent evaluations. We detail the implementation of the record-and-replay mechanism and state management components below. 

Record-and-Replay Mechanism: There exist many implementations of the record-and-replay mechanism [3, 30, 23], allowing automated execution of recorded user actions. These tools typically capture user interactions on a website by extracting web element locators (e.g., XPath, CSS selectors, etc.) during recording, and later replicate (replay) the same interactions by matching the locators to the elements in the DOM. One such implementation is the Chrome DevTools Recorder [13], which we initially use to set the initial state S0 of our system. However, we observe that the tool failed on dynamically rendered, React-based web applications (e.g., Grammarly), where DOM structures are frequently re-generated, attributes may be non-deterministic, and component re-rendering alters element identities. As a result, the recorded locators were often not found during replay. We also observe that this tool does not always support elements present within the Shadow DOM [28] and iframes. Similarly, another tool, Ringer [3], was developed to capture user interactions and replay them later; however, it relied on stable user interfaces and has not been updated to be usable with the dynamic nature of modern user interface designs. These limitations motivate the design of our own record-and-replay tool. Our tool, similar to Ringer [3], is implemented as a browser extension to record execution traces for setting S0, and as a Selenium script to replay the recording with the desired S0. The browser extension contains three major components: (i) a content script injected into every page (including iframes) using Google Manifest V3 [16], (ii) a background service worker that manages the recording session, and (iii) a popup interface through which a user can start, stop, and name a recording session. When a user begins recording a session, the content script dynamically overrides the Event.prototype methods during page load. This helps reliably capture user interactions even on websites that block extensions or injected scripts from recording them. As the user interacts with the page ( click , mousedown , or pointerdown events), the extension observes the event and determines the target element using the event’s composedPath() , preserving traver-sal information across Shadow DOM boundaries. For each event, the extension captures a comprehensive list of web element locators and semantic metadata, ensuring replay robustness for websites that render elements dynamically. This includes basic locators like the CSS selector path (annotated with ::shadow markers at shadow-root boundaries) and XPath; standard attributes like id , name , data-testid , and href ; native interactive tag names (e.g., button ,

input ) and the element’s outerHTML ; ARIA attributes 1 ; the element’s label text; and contextual text from its siblings and parent. However, we found that relying solely on these generic attributes is insufficient for highly dynamic pages, where the attributes change upon page reload (e.g., Grammarly or Reddit). To address this, we implement a novel determin-istic indexing mechanism that we refer to as data-websp-index . This index is generated whenever the rendered 

> 1https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA

6WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks DOM of the page changes, monitored using MutationObserver , using the TreeWalker API to traverse the DOM (including shadow DOMs if applicable) and identify all focusable and interactive elements. Each element is as-signed an index, stored in the custom data-websp-index , based on its rendered DOM order. This ensures that the 

data-websp-index is stable even for dynamically loaded elements. To summarize, the content script captures event information and sends it to the background service worker, which exports it as a structured JSON file that is used by the Selenium-based replay script later. Every recorded event in this file comprehensively details the event type, frame path, event state, generic locators, semantic metadata (ARIA labels and nearby text), and our deterministic data-websp-index . Additionally, the extension captures screenshots for all interactions, enabling visual inspection of the recorded session. The replay component of our tool is a Selenium-based script that uses the extension’s exported JSON session to replay the events required to reach the desired state S0. The script uses a cascading fallback strategy to re-identify the respective elements across both simple and dynamically rendered DOM structures. It first attempts shadow DOM-aware lookups for the stable attributes such as data-testid , id , name , and aria-label . If these attributes fail, the script moves on to identifying the elements using label text, nearby sibling text, CSS selector paths, and XPaths. The last fallback option is the data-websp-index .Once a target element is identified, the script reliably executes the intended action by sequentially attempting standard Selenium clicks, JavaScript-based click injections, and ActionChains mouse simulations until the target element successfully registers the interaction. The script also dynamically manages execution contexts to support complex au-thentication flows (e.g., Google or Microsoft OAuth), automatically detecting and switching the Selenium WebDriver focus to cross-origin iframes or pop-up windows prior to event execution. The replay script also accepts a configuration parameter to explicitly set stateful elements (e.g., toggles and check-boxes) to either an ON or OFF state. Before interacting with a target element, the script determines the existing state based on ARIA attributes ( aria-checked , aria-pressed , aria-selected ) or the native checked property. In some cases, it also incorporates domain-specific heuristics, such as evaluating CSS classes (e.g., a-switch-active ,

a-disabled ) to infer switch states. It skips the interaction if the element already matches the desired configuration. Otherwise, the script performs the interaction and subsequently verifies whether the desired state is achieved. This conditional replay mechanism removes the need for the user to record the interactions for different desired initial states, as the script automatically handles both desired states ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ with a single recorded session capturing the necessary events and elements. 

Account Management: We create a primary Google sockpuppet account that we use to create sockpuppet accounts on other websites in our dataset either through Single Sign-On (SSO) or with the email address and password. We initialize accounts with random attributes, such as name, age, interests, and demographics for websites that require profile details. The primary google account is linked to the Chrome profile tagged with the Selenium automation during the agent runs. Furthermore, some tasks in our dataset require the agent to operate on artifacts present in the created sockpuppet accounts. For example, making a repository on GitHub or HuggingFace as private. To facilitate such task, we programmatically create empty artifacts (e.g., HuggingFace and GitHub repositories). As mentioned above, it is possible that some websites might logout authenticated sessions due to inactivity between evaluation runs. Thus, we record execution traces using our browser extension for automatically logging in to the websites with tasks requiring authentication. The login trace captures a typical sign-in workflow, involving either Google SSO or standard email-password login, starting from the login page. 

State Management: We achieve a consistent S0 for a majority of the required tasks in our dataset using our in-house record-and-replay tool. As mentioned in Section 3.1, we decide the initial state for these tasks based on the type of element that is involved in the task (refer to Table 14). For elements that exhibit binary state (ON and OFF) in isolation like toggle switches and checkboxes, we consider two initial states S0: 1) an All-ON state, where the target and adjacent elements are active; and 2) an All-OFF state, where they are inactive. For elements like radio buttons or dropdowns, where only one element in a group can be active at a time, we initialize S0 with the least-private or least-secure setting (e.g., ’Send me daily email notifications’ over ’Do not send me any email notifications’) as active. Apart from ensuring consistent evaluation across runs, the dual initialization also helps evaluate models’ ability to interpret the required state from the prompt P and the existing state St of relevant elements, and to avoid unnecessary actions. For example, if P instructs model to disable all email notifications, and S0 already reflects this, then the model’s ideal action should be to navigate to the settings page and terminate without interacting the elements. Two authors recorded the necessary actions to set the desired S0 for all tasks using the browser extension and the recorded actions are replayed using the Selenium replay script before an agent attempts the task. 7WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks For a handful of tasks, we set S0 using alternative methods. For some Hugging Face and GitHub tasks, we use the respective official APIs to set S0, e.g., repository visibility tasks. For tasks involving revoking inactive sessions, we define S0 by creating five Selenium sessions that log in to the target website. Lastly, for cookie-related tasks, S0 is always the default cookie setting from the website, which mostly is all cookies being active. This sets by default as we use a copy of the base Chrome profile for each run. 

3.2.2 WebVoyager Enhancements and Differences 

The action space of WebVoyager includes basic actions ‘ CLICK ’, ‘ TYPE ’, ‘ SCROLL ’, ‘ GOBACK ’, ‘ GOOGLE ’, ‘ WAIT ’, and ‘ ANSWER ’. We significantly expand WebVoyager’s action space to accommodate the websites and tasks in our dataset. Webvoyager utilizes Selenium’s ActionChains to focus on elements and perform keyboard inputs. This approach would fail to scroll selected elements for a variety of reasons, including but not limited to non-focusable containers (e.g., <div> ), non-scrollable elements (e.g. overflow: hidden ), and sticky overlays that frequently intercept input events. To address this, we develop a JavaScript-based injection strategy that bypasses the limitations of simulated keyboard events. By querying the DOM stack at specific coordinates via elementsFromPoint , our framework identifies the highest-priority scrollable candidate. Next, the framework validates these candidates based on their computed styles (e.g., overflow ) and properties (e.g., scrollHeight ) to apply programmatic offsets directly to the scrollable DOM node. Furthermore, we extend the scrolling functionality to include 1) ‘ SCROLL TO END ’ that allows rapid scrolling to page footer in long pages, 2) ‘ SCROLL WITHIN POPUP ‘for scrolling inside modals 3) Horizontal scrolling on pages. We also add the action ‘ SWITCH TAB ’ that allows the agent to switch between tabs seamlessly. These navigational enhance-ments are essential for the agent to perform many tasks in our dataset such as disabling cookies. We modify the JavaScript-based interactive element detection tool used in WebVoyager (GPT-4V-Act [8]) to include elements in the Shadow DOM and modal/popup elements. The ‘ TYPE ’ action of WebVoyager includes an automatic ”ENTER” keypress, which we remove allowing the agent to perform tasks such as access token creation on websites like Docker without unintentionally hitting a ‘Submit’ button on the page. We use randomized multi-color bounding boxes to improve element visibility on websites that render in dark mode by default. Additionally, we use the unde-tected chromedriver [48] and automatic captcha solvers [40] in the setup to help avoid bot detection when interacting with websites. Lastly, we adopt the system prompt of WebVoyager with modifications to include the latest practices to system prompt writing and customizing it for evaluating website security and privacy tasks. We include the full system prompt in Section B.1. 

3.3 Automated Verification 

The third module of WebSP-Eval is the fully automated evaluation of the agents on our dataset instances with an MLLM-as-a-Judge [5, 22]. This approach aligns with established Web Agent evaluation [19, 53, 27]. As prior bench-marks deal mostly with information retrieval tasks, their automated evaluators consisted mostly screenshots of the few steps of the agent trajectory. In contrast, we provide the entire trajectory as tasks in our benchmark also involve inter-mediate actions that are relevant to the task. Thus, the input to the judge, MJ comprises: 1) the user prompt P , 2) the agent’s entire task trajectory comprising the actions and environment snapshots (screenshots) provided sequentially, and 3) a manually annotated ground truth action sequence ( G = ( g0, g 1, . . . , g m)). The annotations were performed by an author of this paper, who is an expert at web design and vetted by two leads authors. Each step gt consists of the action along with the target element. The target elements are based on standard convention followed by UI libraries [42]. The ground truth sequence G grounds the judge with necessary actions required to achieve desired final state, including when S0 = Sf (no action needed as initial state and final state are the same). We prompt MJ to evaluate for successful task completion and answer with a binary CORRECT or INCORRECT classi-fication along with a reasoning for its choice. We use this reasoning to assist us with our manual inspection of the trajectories and also use them in some of the analyses to derive stronger conclusions Section 5.4. In addition to the task success and failure, we also track exceeding task maximum time limit (timeout) and maximum iteration count, exceed-ing both results in automatic failure. We detail the judge’s configuration and its performance on a human annotated subset in the upcoming section (Section 4). 

## 4 MLLM Judge Development 

In this section, we describe the manual annotation process used to curate a ground-truth subset of agent trajectories, and detail our automated judge ( MJ ) along with its performance on the annotated data. 8WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks Total Instances #CORRECT #INCORRECT 

200 115 85 (a) Data Statistics                     

> Judge Model Precision Recall F1 Acc
> Gemini-3-Pro 93.0 92.2 92.6 91.5 Claude-Opus-4.6 96.4 93.91 95.2 94.5 Gemini-3.1-Pro 98.15 92.17 95.07 94.5 Majority Ensemble 97.30 93.91 95.57 95

(b) Judge Performance Table 2: Dataset overview and judge validation results. 

Human Annotated Judge Evaluation Dataset Curation: We sample 200 agent trajectories across different models and datasets variants (refer to Section 5.1). To ensure a balanced initial distribution, we use predictions from an early version of our automated judge based on Google’s Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] to select 100 CORRECT and 100 INCORRECT 

instances. Next, one author manually inspected these agent trajectories against task instruction P using the ground truth actions G as a reference, and assigned a label to them. Another author vetted the annotations to ensure high quality. The final dataset following the annotation process is slightly imbalanced towards the CORRECT (115 instances). We then use this curated dataset to iteratively develop and evaluate our automated judge MJ .

Iterative Judge Development: We build our judge based on three state-of-the-art reasoning models: Google’s 

Gemini-3-Pro [12] and Gemini-3.1-Pro [14], and Anthropic’s Claude-Opus-4.6 [2]. We consider a random subset of 10 examples from the evaluation dataset to tune the system prompt, temperature, reasoning budget, and ordering of the input on Google’s AI Studio [15] for the Gemini-3-Pro model. We slowly test improvements obtained in Gemini-3-Pro’s judgment on the 10 examples and replicate the same setup across all the three models on the whole evaluation dataset through the respective API endpoints. All three models operate with an almost similar system prompt that is available in Section B.2, a temperature of 1.0 (recommended/default setting for reasoning models) with a ‘high’ or ‘dynamic’ thinking budget. Finally, we implement a majority-vote ensemble of the three models to determine final task success. 

Judge performance: The final evaluation results at the end of our iterative design process are in Table 2. While, Gemini-3.1-Pro is more precise than the other two models, and Claude-Opus-4.6 achieves the best recall and F1 score of 93.91% and 95.2%, respectively. Gemini-3-Pro is slightly worse than the other two models. Overall, the majority-vote ensemble is the best-performing model with an F1 score of 95.57% and 95% human agreement. Despite the standalone capabilities of Opus-4.6 and Gemini-3.1-Pro, we opt for the ensemble as our final automated judge MJ for assessing the agents on the whole dataset as it not just achieves highest F1 scores but also mitigates a single-model’s randomness. An analysis of the ten failure cases reveals that eight involve tasks targeting moderately or small-sized UI elements (e.g., checkboxes, toggles, or radio buttons), while two others relate to access token creation. One of the UI element failure is a cookie task where the judge is not able to identify the colors pertaining to ON and OFF states. Nevertheless, the overall accuracy of the ensemble approach remains sufficiently high to guarantee a sufficiently faithful evaluation of the agents across different backbone LLMs. 

## 5 Experimental Results 

In this section, first we describe the evaluation setup and introduce the three research questions that guide our analyses. Next, in each subsequent subsection, we report inferences on analyses addressing each research question individually. 

5.1 Evaluation Setup 

We run our Agent Instantiation with seven backbone MLLMs on the 200 instances in our dataset. The models com-prise six proprietary models: Google’s Gemini-3-Pro , Gemini-2.5-Pro & Gemini-2.5-Flash [7], Anthropic’s Claude-Sonnet-4.5 & Claude-Haiku-4.5 [1], and OpenAI’s GPT-5.1 & GPT-5-mini [44], and one open-weight model Google’s 

Gemma-3-27B [45]. The proprietary models are all reasoning models and among the flagship models offered by the 9WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks providers, and Gemma-3-27B is a non-reasoning model among the leading open-weight non-reasoning models. In-cluding Gemma-3-27B allows the understanding the state of open-weight models for complex, non-retrieval web agent tasks. Evaluating open models is crucial, as they enable privacy-preserving, on-device execution unlike the propri-etary counterparts. We use the API endpoints from Google Cloud Platform for Gemini, Claude and Gemma, and use Microsoft Azure Platform API endpoints for GPT. We set the temperature to 1.0, use ‘dynamic’ thinking mode for all reasoning models, and set maximum output tokens to 8192 for Claude models and 10,000 for the other models (much higher than tokens required by the agent to describe its thoughts and action). We integrate these models with our Agent Instantiation configuring maximum number of non-scroll and non-wait iterations per run to 20, and maximum runtime to 10 minutes. This setting is supported by the statistics from the ground truth: 1) Average number of non-scroll and non-wait actions across the instances in our dataset is 5.16 (56 instances with 5 actions), 2) Maximum number of actions is 13 (1 instance), and 3) Minimum number of actions is 2 (5 instances). Our evaluation is performed on live websites. We run all websites in a ‘light mode’ enforcing it through the Selenium ChromeDriver 2 and use randomized bounding box colors for the SoMs to ensure the color of the website background does not inhibit the models from ‘observing’ the interactive elements due to similar color bounding box colors. The backbone models execute a task by planning and reasoning about the task from the user prompt, and exploring 

the website by proposing actions which the Selenium automation tool executes on the environment and provides visual feedback to the models as they proceed with the task. To understand whether models are able to plan and explore a website independently, we employ two variants of our datasets by varying the user prompt P for a task T .In the first variant, hereafter referred to as WithNav , we construct user prompts with navigation instructions and task instruction. For example, “Navigate to my account settings and then privacy settings, and ensure my trip type is enabled as viewable while my name and location are disabled for my reviews.” In the second variant, hereafter referred to as 

W/oNav , the user prompt P is just the task instruction. For example, ‘Ensure my trip type is enabled as viewable while my name and location are disabled for my reviews.” We pose the following three research questions: 

Research Questions 

RQ1: Can web agents autonomously execute tasks, and how does their performance differ with and without explicit navigational instructions? 

RQ2: How does model performance vary across different websites and task categories? 

RQ3: How does model performance vary across different UI elements and their initial states? We assess each agent trajectory’s success and failure using our automated judge (Section 4) and answer the above questions predominantly quantitatively, measuring success rate (percentage of successful instances) and failure rate for each model across the dataset variants. The failure count is a total of the explicit mistakes by the model (as predicted by the judge) and the number of instances that hit time or iteration limit (automatically resulting in a failure). We also present some representative agent trajectories showcasing specific failures. 

5.2 RQ1: Analyzing Exploration Capabilities of Backbone Models 

Table 3 contains the overall performance of the eight models across the 200 instances in both the WithNav and W/oNav 

dataset variants. Gemini-3-Pro-Preview is the best performing model (83% on WithNav and 76.5% on W/oNav ). The open-source model Gemma-3-27b is the worst performing, achieving 26% and 21% on the WithNav and W/oNav 

variants. All models show higher success rates for WithNav compared to W/oNav . The biggest performance drop from 

WithNav to W/oNav is for Gemini-2.5-Flash, with a relative difference of 11.5% (23 instances). Comparing the models from the same provider, we generally observe that the ‘bigger’ or ’more expressive’ model show a higher success rate and better robustness when navigation is not a part for the instruction. This could potentially be due to the stronger reasoning and planning capabilities. For instance, the Anthropic model Claude-Haiku-4.5 shows a drop in success rate of 7.5% (15 instances), whereas its more capable counterpart Claude-Sonnet-4.5 drops only by 1.0%. This is also true for the Google models. Gemini-2.5-Flash shows a drop of 11.5% (23 instances), when compared to 3.0% (Gemini-2.5-Pro) and 6.5% (Gemini-3-Pro). The anomaly to this is GPT-5-Mini, which is slightly better for W/oNav compared to GPT-5.1 (43.5% vs 43% success rate). These overall trends show that models indeed perform better on average, when provided with the navigation needed to execute the task. 

> 2Works except when ‘dark mode’ is enforced by the website

10 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

# Model WithNav Variant W/oNav Variant Success Error Tout Success Error Tout 

# Gemini-2.5-Flash 123 68 9 100 87 13 Gemini-2.5-Pro 127 65 8 121 75 4Gemini-3-Pro-Preview 166 26 8 153 32 15 Claude-Haiku-4.5 118 25 57 103 28 69 Claude-Sonnet-4.5 121 31 48 119 31 50 GPT-5-Mini 91 23 86 87 30 83 GPT-5.1 101 69 30 86 89 25 Gemma-3-27b 52 126 22 42 127 31 Table 3: Overall performance of the evaluated backbone models on the WithNav and W/oNav dataset variants. The 

Success column indicates the number of successfully completed instances. The Error column represents explicit failures from the model. Tout denotes tasks that terminated due to a maximum task time of 600 seconds or a 20 iteration limit on non-scroll and non-wait actions. (Success + Error + T out equals the 200 total evaluation instances for both variants). 

Model Both Correct Only WithNav Only W/oNav Both Failed 

Gemini-2.5-Flash 81 42 19 58 Gemini-2.5-Pro 95 32 26 47 Gemini-3-Pro-Preview 138 28 15 19 

Claude-Haiku-4.5 81 37 22 60 Claude-Sonnet-4.5 89 32 30 49 GPT-5-Mini 66 25 21 88 GPT-5.1 63 38 23 76 Gemma-3-27b 25 27 17 131 Table 4: Instance-level performance comparison across the WithNav and W/oNav dataset variants. The columns indicate the number of instances where a model succeeded in both variants (Both Correct), or exclusively in one variant (Only WithNav or Only W/oNav), or failed in both (Both Failed). To further understand if navigational information in the prompt improves model performance, we present another instance-level analysis in Table 4, detailing instances where models succeed with and without navigational information, succeed only with or only without it, or fail in both cases. The results again reinforce that models generally benefit from explicit navigation details. Gemini-3-Pro-Preview is the most consistent and capable model across the two variants. It solves 138 out of the 200 instances regardless of whether navigation is included in its prompt, while failing in both variants only 19 times. Gemma-3-27b fails in both variants on 131 instances, while succeeding in both on just 25 instances. The results also reveal that when a model succeeds on only one variant, it is almost always the WithNav variant. For example, there is a wide gap in the performance when comparing instances that were only solved in WithNav and 

W/oNav : 42 vs 19 instances for Gemini-2.5-Flash and 38 vs 23 instances for GPT-5.1. Claude-Sonnet-4.5’s differ-ence is the smallest as it solves 32 instances exclusively in WithNav and 30 in W/oNav suggesting better exploratory capabilities compared to other models. Apart from the overall success rate, Table 3 also includes task failures due to task timeout or iteration limit on non-scroll and non-wait instances, revealing differences in how models fail across different tasks. The failures of all Gemini models are more due to explicit errors while completing the task than to timing out (maximum only 15 11 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks instances). GPT-5-Mini’s failures are significantly more due to timeout or iteration limit across both WithNav and 

W/oNav , highlighting potential limitations in exploring websites and deciding actions in the given time even when provided with navigation. Claude-Sonnet-4.5 and Claude-Haiku-4.5 also show more failures due to timeout than explicit mistakes for both variants. Gemma-3-27b’s failures are dominated by explicit mistakes in completing the task rather than timeouts. We present examples of two successful task completions on the W/oNav variant by models Gemma-3-27b and Claude-Haiku-4.5 in Figure 4, and Figure 5. We also present a specific case in Figure 6, where Gemini-3-Pro successfully completes a Twitch task to disable story mentions only when provided with explicit navigational instruction. 

5.3 RQ2: Analyzing Performance Across Websites and Task Categories 

In this subsection we address RQ2 by breakdowning success rate by website and task category.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

> Website W/oNav Variant # Inst. 2.5F 2.5P 3P H4.5 S4.5 5m 5.1 3Ge
> Airbnb 459271459AlJazeera 000100011
> AllRecipes 110110001
> Amazon 445364428BBC 333333203Coursera 244643116Docker 325254108Duolingo 337454337GitHub 12 11 12 9510 9414 Goal 114521306Goodreads 155111216GoogleAdCenter 557662317Grammarly 3810 7695310 HuggingFace 677586829
> Website W/oNav Variant # Inst. 2.5F 2.5P 3P H4.5 S4.5 5m 5.1 3Ge
> IKEA 112221102Moodle 224020005NVIDIA 022333103OldReddit 564263448OpenStreetMap 112111102Pinterest 811 12 10 974217 Quora 677011139Reddit 6610 7510 8210 Shein 131130213Steam 5496725017 Twitch 6874833211 USAToday 112232214Wattpad 546665646Wolfram 567765408

Table 5: Agent performance breakdown by website for the W/oNav dataset variant 2. The best or join-best performing model are in bold. 

Task Category 2.5F 2.5P 3P H4.5 S4.5 5m 5.1 3Ge # Inst. # Websites 

Account Security & Access Control 17 15 19 10 15 11 13 5 22 10 Advertising & Personalization Control 9 12 19 13 14 9 9 6 19 7Cookie & Tracking Consent Management 7 16 15 18 19 11 9 1 24 8Data & Asset Management 4 5 5 3 5 4 6 2 6 2Notification & Communication Preferences 27 25 37 30 29 24 24 12 51 13 Profile Visibility & Customization 12 12 18 4 10 7 10 9 22 9Social Safety & Content Moderation 15 21 24 13 16 9 9 3 31 8UI/UX Preferences 1 2 2 0 2 2 2 0 5 3User Privacy & Data Rights 8 13 14 12 9 10 4 4 20 8Table 6: Agent success rates broken down by task category for the W/oNav dataset variant 3. The best or join-best performing models are in bold. 

Performance breakdown by websites: Although websites share underlying structural principles (e.g., settings ac-cessible through profile icon on top right corner), their specific user interfaces are unique. To understand if models struggle with any distinct website environments, we analyze the performance breakdown across individual websites in the W/oNav variant (refer to Table 5). As one would expect from earlier results, Gemini-3-Pro is the best or joint-best performing model for 17 out of the 28 websites. However, the overall results convey some interesting anomalies where lower-ranked models from Section 5.2 perform better. For example, Claude-Haiku-4.5 achieves a perfect success rate on Coursera (6 out of 6 instances), outper-

> 2

Shorthands 2.5F, 2.5P, 3P, H4.5, S4.5, 5m, 5.1, and 3Ge refer to Gemini-2.5-Flash, Gemini-2.5-Pro, Gemini-3-Pro, Claude-Haiku-4.5, Claude-Sonnet-4.5, GPT-5-mini, GPT-5.1, and Gemma-3-27B, respectively. 

12 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks forming both Gemini-3-Pro (4 instances) and its more capable counterpart Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (4 instances). Similarly, GPT-5-mini matches Gemini-3-Pro on Reddit by solving all 10 instances, and nearly solves all Grammarly instances (9 out of 10). For both these websites, GPT-5-mini also outperforms GPT-5.1 (8 and 5 instances, respectively). The results also reveal that even the best performing models can struggle with certain websites are harder to understand and interact with. For example, it can be noted that seven out of the eight models fail to achieve 50% success rate on Steam (17 instances), and even Gemini-3-Pro can only get 9 out of 17 tasks right. The same is also observable with Docker and Goal, where five of the eight models can only solve less than 50% of the instances. It is to be noted that all 6 Goal instances belong to the same task category( Table 9), Notification & Communication Preferences. This supports the hypothesis that models indeed struggle with specific UI patterns and layouts that are unique across websites. We provide two examples of website specific design elements that confuse models. The first is that of Steam( Figure 3), where the task is to disable two settings options in communication preferences. The model, Gemini-3-Pro, correctly disables these options but fails to scroll down to click on ‘Save Changes’ button. Thus, the models changes never get stored properly. The next example is that of Duolingo (Figure 7), where Gemini-2.5-Pro, drifts from solving the task of making the user’s profile private and instead solves an introductory French lesson. 

Performance breakdown by task categories: Task categories also rely on similar structural principles with unique, website-specific implementations. For example, while cookie notices are mostly present in the footer through either ‘Privacy Choices’ or ‘Cookies’ textual elements, the elements used to enable or disable cookies differ, ranging from toggle switches (NVIDIA) to radio buttons (BBC). Thus, we also breakdown the performance based on the task cate-gory in Table 6 to analyze if models can successfully perform similar tasks across different websites. Consistent with earlier trends, Gemini-3-Pro is the most best model, achieving best or join-best performance in 7 out of 9 categories, including task categories like Notifications & Communication Preferences (37 out of 51), and Social Safety & Content Moderation (24 out of 31). Similar to performance breakdown on websites, here too we notice that specific models perform better than Gemini-3-Pro on some task categories. For example, Claude-Sonnet-4.5 achieves the highest success rate on Cookie & Tracking Consent Management instances, solving 19 out of 24, outperforming both Gemini-2.5-Pro (16 instances) and Gemini-3-Pro (15 instances). GPT-5.1 solves all 6 Data & Asset Management instances belonging to the websites HuggingFace and GitHub. And we also notice GPT-5-mini successfully completes 10 out of 20 instances in User Privacy & Data Rights category, which only does 4 tasks. Gemma-3-27b shows extremely limited performance across most categories, with a notable case of Cookie & Tracking Consent Management (1 out of 24 instances) tasks highlighting the gap that exists between open-weight and proprietary reasoning models. Our results also reveal that models struggle mostly with three categories: 1) UI/UX Preferences (where all models have less than 50% success across 5 instances); 2) Profile Visibility & Customization (where 5 models have below 50% success across 22 instances); and 3) Social Safety & Content Moderation (where 5 models show less than 50% success rate across 31 instances). We present an example in Figure 8, showcasing an example where GPT-5-Mini keeps opening and closing the cookie notice even after successfully setting the cookies as requested in the instruction. 

5.4 RQ3: Analyzing Performance Across UI elements and Initial States 

In this subsection, we address RQ3 by analyzing how models comprehend different UI elements and their state through two separate analyses. 

Performance breakdown by UI elements: To determine if models are sensitive to specific interaction modalities, we evaluate performance based on the target UI element types required to execute each task (refer to Table 7, meaning the model must correctly interact with every designated element type to successfully complete the instance. We extract these target elements for each instance from the manually annotated ground truth actions (refer to Section 3.3). In addition to this, we use the reasoning output from Gemini-3.1-Pro, the most precise model in our ensemble judge, to identify if explicit model failures (without considering timeout) are directly due to one or more specific UI elements in ground truth elements. To perform this, we pass Gemini-3.1-Pro’s reason along with the ground truth actions and UI elements to Gemini-3-Pro in a separate evaluator. We include the system prompt for this evaluator in Section B.3. We manually check a sample to ensure it is correct. In Table 7, these element-specific failure counts are denoted in parentheses. Gemini-3-Pro achieves the highest success rate across all elements except Radio Button s. For the other models, tasks involving the UI elements Text Input (14 instances) and Menu (7 instances) lead to uniformly low success 13 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks Step 1: Click [23]  Step 2: Click [17]  Step 3: Click [28]   

> Step 4: Click [15] Step 5: Click [20] Step 6: ANSWER – Task Solved

Figure 3: Failure example highlighting website specific design on Steam (Gemini-3-Pro, W/oNav variant). Given the instruction “Disable email notifications for ‘A seasonal promotion is beginning’ and ‘Game-specific event notifica-tions’,” the model correctly disables the options but fails to scroll down to click on ‘Save Changes’ button, meaning the changes are never stored. 

UI Element 2.5F 2.5P 3P H4.5 S4.5 5m 5.1 3Ge # Inst. 

Button 54 (17) 71 (9) 86 (3) 58 (9) 75 (9) 49 (7) 49 (7) 22 (4) 111 Checkbox 17 (17) 22 (12) 27 (6) 17 (12) 19 (8) 12 (5) 13 (5) 8 (6) 40 Dropdown 47 (8) 47 (6) 68 (2) 40 (3) 50 (2) 36 (6) 39 (6) 17 (2) 93 Icon 30 (1) 35 (1) 40 (0) 26 (0) 26 (0) 23 (1) 24 (1) 10 (0) 52 Link 87 (16) 101 (14) 126 (5) 87 (3) 100 (4) 73 (11) 72 (11) 34 (5) 172 Menu 2 (1) 4 (0) 7 (0) 1 (0) 5 (0) 0 (1) 2 (1) 3 (0) 7Option 41 (3) 46 (1) 60 (0) 35 (0) 42 (0) 33 (1) 32 (1) 18 (0) 77 Radio Button 15 (0) 14 (5) 12 (4) 7 (4) 13 (4) 7 (2) 9 (2) 4 (4) 20 Text Input 8 (3) 6 (3) 11 (0) 4 (0) 7 (0) 3 (3) 6 (3) 1 (0) 14 Toggle 37 (46) 55 (45) 74 (19) 56 (9) 55 (19) 45 (9) 37 (10) 20 (20) 98 Table 7: Performance breakdown by target UI element for the W/oNav dataset variant 2. The # Inst. column indicates the total number of unique instances where the corresponding UI element is part of the task’s solution. The model columns report the number of successful tasks involving the UI element, with task failures directly attributed to that specific element shown in parentheses. rates. For instance, GPT-5-mini is able to complete only 3 and 0 tasks involving these elements, respectively, ex-plicitly failing due to the Text Input in 3 instances and the Menu in 1 instance. Furthermore, stateful elements like 

Toggle (98 instances) and Radio Button (20 instances), which form a major portion of our dataset, lead to lower success rates and high direct failure rates across all models. For example, both Gemini-2.5-Flash and Gemini-2.5-Pro struggle significantly with toggles: 2.5-Flash has 46 instances of direct failures (46.9% of toggle tasks) compared to 37 successes, and Gemini-2.5-Pro shows 45 direct failures. Similarly, Gemma-3-27B successfully completes tasks 14 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

Model Both Correct Only ON Only OFF Both Failed 

Gemini-2.5-Flash 13 19 11 19 Gemini-2.5-Pro 20 21 6 15 Gemini-3-Pro-Preview 39 10 8 5

Claude-Haiku-4.5 22 10 7 23 Claude-Sonnet-4.5 18 19 8 17 GPT-5-Mini 17 9 5 31 GPT-5.1 10 12 14 26 Gemma-3-27b 5 7 8 42 Table 8: Task-level performance comparison across a total of 62 tasks with both initital states ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’. The columns indicate the number of instances where a model succeeded in both states (Both Correct), or exclusively in one state (Only ON or Only OFF), or failed in both states (Both Failed). involving toggles in only 20 instances, while it fails directly due to toggles in another 20 instances. We also observe that within the Claude and GPT families, performance on toggles is relatively consistent between variants, whereas the larger models (Claude-Sonnet-4.5 and GPT-5.1) demonstrate better performance on radio buttons. Lastly, we notice that the UI elements Link and Button show considerably lower direct failure rates relative to their frequency across all models. This suggests that while models reliably complete tasks involving standard navigational elements like links and buttons, their capabilities degrade significantly on elements that require conditional interaction. We explore this state-dependency further in the subsequent analysis. 

Performance across tasks with dual initial state: As mentioned earlier in Section 3.1, our dataset includes tasks evaluated under dual initial states (‘ON’ and ‘OFF’), requiring different solutions for the same user instruction. For example, when instructed to disable a toggle that is already ‘OFF’, the agent must correctly perceive this initial state 

S0 of OFF and not interact with the elements unnecessarily. We analyze these paired instances representing 62 tasks in W/oNav (mostly involving UI elements toggle and checkboxes), to assess how frequently models successfully solve both configurations of the exact same task. The results are available in Table 8. Gemini-3-Pro exhibits best state-awareness, successfully completing 39 tasks for both initial states and only for the ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ states, in 10 and 8 instances respectively. We observe that most models succeed more frequently when the initial state S0 is ‘ON’ rather than ‘OFF’, showing a strong dependency on S0. For instance, Gemini-2.5 Pro exclusively solves more tasks when 

S0 is ‘ON’ (21 tasks) than when it is ‘OFF’ (6). It is to be noted that a majority of these 62 tasks involve disabling options or a combination of enabling and disabling options. This discrepancy along with results indicate that models frequently fail to accurately perceive the initial element state, often executing incorrect action sequences when the setting is already ‘OFF’ (more apparent in smaller models). This shows the current web agents have to be improved on comprehending element state, with respect to the instruction, before deployments to solve website security and privacy tasks. 

## 6 Limitations and Future Work 

We identify the following limitations in our framework WebSP-Eval and outline ideas for addressing them in future work. We also include our commitments to releasing our framework post acceptance of the paper. 

Website Restrictions and Excluded Tasks: We deliberately excluded websites requiring real personally identifi-able information (e.g., banking portals), and sites from the Tranco list containing explicit content. Additionally, we omitted platforms enforcing stringent identity verification, such as biometric checks (e.g., Facebook and Instagram) and mandatory 2FA (e.g., ESPN). Finally, we bypassed websites employing aggressive anti-bot countermeasures that our implemented anti-bot detection measures could not bypass (e.g., ChatGPT; refer to Section 3.2.2). 

Initial Manual Setup and Replication Overhead: Creating the dataset required significant manual effort, including registering sock puppet accounts across numerous websites and identifying relevant website security and privacy 15 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks tasks. Due to ethical constraints, we cannot share these accounts or the recorded authentication sessions for Agent Instantiation. Consequently, researchers evaluating their models on our benchmark must first create their own accounts and manually record login traces using our extension. To facilitate this, our repository will provide detailed setup instructions, specifying which platforms require Google SSO versus standard email authentication. 

Website Volatility and State Resets: We evaluate web agents on live websites. Thus, our framework, especially the state management step in Agent Instantiation, is susceptible to structural and UI updates. For example, during our experiments, Steam modified the sidebar cookie window label on the ’Preferences’ page from ‘Cookies and Browsing’ to ‘Data and Browsing’. To manage this issue, we will open-source our recording extension upon paper acceptance with detailed instructions to record the state reset execution traces. In the future, we plan to clone websites into a sandboxed environment, where such issues can be totally mitigated. It would also make working with locally hosted backbone models easier. 

Challenges in Exact Replication: Exact replication of our results is difficult for several practical reasons. First, privacy and security settings on websites are governed by guidelines like GDPR, CCPA, etc. Thus, cross-region deployment of these interfaces of the same website is often different. For example, cookie notices can vary across countries [39]. Second, the backbone LLMs are inherently random, and can occasionally yield varying responses. Finally, due to strict academic budget constraints, we use models through specific API endpoints to control our costs. Such differences in geographic location, API configurations, web content rendering make exact replication of the results challenging, if not impossible. 

The Necessity of Local Open-Source Deployments: The role of open-source and local models is especially impor-tant when deploying web agents to execute website security and privacy tasks on a user’s behalf, given the sensitive nature of the data involved. In our evaluation, we observed a substantial performance gap between the open-weight model (Gemma-3-27B) and proprietary models. Bridging this gap is critical for enabling practical, privacy-preserving deployments and plan to pursue in future work. 

## 7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce WebSP-Eval , a comprehensive evaluation framework designed to assess web agent eval-uation on a new dataset of 200 website security and privacy task instances that are paired with an initial state. We develop a robust a account and state management tool based on a custom Google Chrome extension and use it to build our agentic system for executing website tasks. We instantiate this systems with 8 MLLMs and perform fine-grained evaluation across websites, task categories, and UI element types. Our analyses reveal that models experience a per-formance drop when explicit navigational details are not part of the instruction, and struggled extensively with stateful UI elements, often demonstrating a bias towards altering already correct initial states. These vulnerabilities highlight critical barriers for safe deployment of web agents. If an agent is trusted with sensitive account settings, making these kinds of basic execution errors could easily compromise a user’s security or leak private data. WebSP-Eval presents the research community a standardized dataset, a system with state controls plus agent implementation, and an automated judge—to rigorously to test performance. 16 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

## References 

[1] Anthropic. Introducing claude sonnet 4.5. https://www-cdn.anthropic.com/ 963373e433e489a87a10c823c52a0a013e9172dd.pdf , September 2025. Released September 29, 2025, Accessed: 02-03-2026. [2] Anthropic. Introducing claude opus 4.6. https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-opus-4-6 , February 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-26. [3] Shaon Barman, Sarah Chasins, Rastislav Bodik, and Sumit Gulwani. Ringer: web automation by demonstration. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGPLAN international conference on object-oriented programming, systems, languages, and applications , pages 748–764, 2016. [4] L´ eo Boisvert, Megh Thakkar, Maxime Gasse, Massimo Caccia, Thibault L De Chezelles, Quentin Cappart, Nicolas Chapados, Alexandre Lacoste, and Alexandre Drouin. Workarena++: Towards compositional planning and reasoning-based common knowledge work tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:5996–6051, 2024. [5] Dongping Chen, Ruoxi Chen, Shilin Zhang, Yaochen Wang, Yinuo Liu, Huichi Zhou, Qihui Zhang, Yao Wan, Pan Zhou, and Lichao Sun. Mllm-as-a-judge: Assessing multimodal llm-as-a-judge with vision-language bench-mark. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [6] De Chezelles, Thibault Le Sellier, Sahar Omidi Shayegan, Lawrence Keunho Jang, Xing Han L` u, Ori Yoran, Dehan Kong, Frank F Xu, Siva Reddy, Quentin Cappart, et al. The browsergym ecosystem for web agent research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05467 , 2024. [7] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. [8] ddupont. Gpt-4v-act: Chromium copilo. https://github.com/ddupont808/GPT-4V-Act , 2023. [9] Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Sam Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:28091–28114, 2023. [10] Alexandre Drouin, Maxime Gasse, Massimo Caccia, Issam H Laradji, Manuel Del Verme, Tom Marty, L´ eo Boisvert, Megh Thakkar, Quentin Cappart, David Vazquez, et al. Workarena: How capable are web agents at solving common knowledge work tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07718 , 2024. [11] Federal Trade Commission. How websites and apps collect and use your information. https://consumer. ftc.gov/articles/how-websites-apps-collect-use-your-information , 2025. Accessed: 2025-09-25. [12] Gemini Team. Gemini 3 Technical Report. Technical report, Google DeepMind, November 2025. [13] Google. Recorder panel: Record and measure user flow — chrome devtools. https://developer.chrome. com/docs/devtools/recorder/overview , 2024. Accessed: 2026-02-26. [14] Google. Gemini 3.1 pro. https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/models-and-research/ gemini-models/gemini-3-1-pro/ , 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [15] Google. Google AI studio. https://aistudio.google.com/ , 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-26. [16] Google. Manifest v3 — chrome for developers. https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/ develop/migrate/what-is-mv3 , 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-26. [17] Google. Puppeteer: Node.js api for chrome. https://pptr.dev/ , 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-26. [18] Google DeepMind. Project Mariner: An autonomous web agent, 2025. Accessed: 2026-01-24. [19] Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan, and Dong Yu. Webvoyager: Building an end-to-end web agent with large multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13919 ,2024. [20] Faria Huq, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Frank F Xu, Tianyue Ou, Shuyan Zhou, Jeffrey P Bigham, and Graham Neubig. Cowpilot: a framework for autonomous and human-agent collaborative web navigation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (System Demonstrations) , pages 163–172, 2025. [21] Melody Y Ivory, Rashmi R Sinha, and Marti A Hearst. Empirically validated web page design metrics. In 

Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 53–60, 2001. 17 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks [22] Seongyun Lee, Seungone Kim, Sue Park, Geewook Kim, and Minjoon Seo. Prometheus-vision: Vision-language model as a judge for fine-grained evaluation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 11286–11315, 2024. [23] Maurizio Leotta, Andrea Stocco, Filippo Ricca, and Paolo Tonella. Robula+: An algorithm for generating robust xpath locators for web testing. Journal of Software: Evolution and Process , 28(3):177–204, 2016. [24] Ido Levy, Ben Wiesel, Sami Marreed, Alon Oved, Avi Yaeli, and Segev Shlomov. St-webagentbench: A bench-mark for evaluating safety and trustworthiness in web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06703 , 2024. [25] Haoran Li, Wenbin Hu, Huihao Jing, Yulin Chen, Qi Hu, Sirui Han, Tianshu Chu, Peizhao Hu, and Yangqiu Song. Privaci-bench: Evaluating privacy with contextual integrity and legal compliance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17041 , 2025. [26] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:34892–34916, 2023. [27] Xing Han L` u, Amirhossein Kazemnejad, Nicholas Meade, Arkil Patel, Dongchan Shin, Alejandra Zambrano, Karolina Sta´ nczak, Peter Shaw, Christopher J Pal, and Siva Reddy. Agentrewardbench: Evaluating automatic evaluations of web agent trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08942 , 2025. [28] MDN contributors. Using shadow dom - web apis — mdn. https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/ docs/Web/API/Web_components/Using_shadow_DOM , 2025. Accessed: 2026-02-26. [29] Microsoft. Playwright: Fast and reliable end-to-end testing for modern web apps. https://playwright.dev/ ,2026. Accessed: 2026-02-26. [30] Michel Nass, Emil Al´ egroth, and Robert Feldt. Improving web element localization by using a large language model. Software Testing, Verification and Reliability , 34(7):e1893, 2024. [31] National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC). Advice & guidance — all topics. https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/ section/advice-guidance/all-topics , 2025. Accessed: 2025-09-25. [32] National Institute of Standards and Technology. The NIST cybersecurity framework (CSF) 2.0. Cybersecurity White Paper CSWP 29, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2024. Accessed: 2025-09-25. [33] Liangbo Ning, Ziran Liang, Zhuohang Jiang, Haohao Qu, Yujuan Ding, Wenqi Fan, Xiao-yong Wei, Shanru Lin, Hui Liu, Philip S Yu, et al. A survey of webagents: Towards next-generation ai agents for web automation with large foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23350 , 2025. [34] OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt atlas. Technical report, OpenAI, October 2025. Accessed: 2026-01-24. [35] OpenAI. Operator system card. Technical report, OpenAI, January 2025. Accessed: 2026-01-24. [36] Perplexity AI. Comet: The AI-powered browser, 2025. https://www.perplexity.ai/comet .[37] Victor Le Pochat, Tom Van Goethem, Samaneh Tajalizadehkhoob, Wouter Joosen, et al. Tranco: A research-oriented top sites ranking hardened against manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01156 , 2018. [38] Arianna Rossi and Simon Parkin. ” what i’m interested in is something that violates the law”: Regulatory practitioner views on automated detection of deceptive design patterns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.16302 , 2026. [39] Safna. Cookie Consent Trends by Country: 2026 Global Compliance Guide. https://www.cookieyes.com/ blog/cookie-consent-trends/ , January 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-01. [40] sarperavci. Google recaptcha solver. https://github.com/sarperavci/GoogleRecaptchaBypass , 2024. [41] Selenium Project. Selenium automates browsers. that’s it! https://www.selenium.dev/ , 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-26. [42] shadcn. shadcn/ui: The foundation for your design system. https://ui.shadcn.com/ , 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-25. [43] Yijia Shao, Tianshi Li, Weiyan Shi, Yanchen Liu, and Diyi Yang. Privacylens: Evaluating privacy norm aware-ness of language models in action. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:89373–89407, 2024. [44] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al. Openai gpt-5 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267 ,2025. [45] Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ram´ e, Morgane Rivi` ere, et al. Gemma 3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786 , 2025. 18 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks [46] Trellix TrustedSource. Trellix trustedsource web database reference guide. Technical report, Trellix, 2024. 

https://trustedsource.org/download/ts_wd_reference_guide.pdf .[47] Ada Defne Tur, Nicholas Meade, Xing Han L` u, Alejandra Zambrano, Arkil Patel, Esin Durmus, Spandana Gella, Karolina Sta´ nczak, and Siva Reddy. Safearena: Evaluating the safety of autonomous web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04957 , 2025. [48] ultrafunkamsterdam. undetected-chromedriver: Custom selenium chromedriver — zero-config — passes all bot mitigation systems. https://github.com/ultrafunkamsterdam/undetected-chromedriver , 2026. Accessed: 2026-02-27. [49] R´ emy van der Heijden and Cormier P´ epin. Structural profiling of web sites in the wild. In International Confer-ence on Web Engineering (ICWE) , pages 225–240. Springer, 2020. [50] Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Chunyuan Li, and Jianfeng Gao. Set-of-mark prompting unleashes extraordinary visual grounding in gpt-4v. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11441 , 2023. [51] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:20744– 20757, 2022. [52] Ori Yoran, Samuel Joseph Amouyal, Chaitanya Malaviya, Ben Bogin, Ofir Press, and Jonathan Berant. Assis-tantbench: Can web agents solve realistic and time-consuming tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15711 , 2024. [53] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854 , 2023. 19 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

## A Task Details 

Task Category Task IDs 

Account Security & Access Control Airbnb task-111, Airbnb task-219, Amazon task-221, Docker task-2, Docker task-3, Docker task-4, Duolingo task-222, GitHub task-132, GitHub task-133, GitHub task-134 (2), GitHub task-135 (2), Goodreads task-100, Grammarly task-24, Hugging-Face task-120, HuggingFace task-121, HuggingFace task-122, HuggingFace task-220, Moodle task-209, Pinterest task-218, Pinterest task-68 Advertising & Personalization Control Amazon task-190, Amazon task-88, Duolingo task-104 (2), Goodreads task-75, GoogleAdCenter task-138 (2), GoogleAdCenter task-139, GoogleAdCenter task-140, GoogleAdCenter task-82 (2), Grammarly task-16 (2), Pinterest task-61 (2), Pin-terest task-64 (2), Reddit task-50 (2) Cookie & Tracking Consent Management AllRecipes task-154, BBC task-167, BBC task-168, BBC task-169, Coursera task-155, Coursera task-156, Coursera task-157, Docker task-142, Docker task-143, Docker task-144, IKEA task-158, IKEA task-159, NVIDIA task-145, NVIDIA task-146, NVIDIA task-147, Shein task-161, Shein task-162, Shein task-163, Steam task-191 (2), Steam task-192 (2), Steam task-193 (2) Data & Asset Management GitHub task-126, HuggingFace task-113, HuggingFace task-114, Hugging-Face task-116, HuggingFace task-117, HuggingFace task-118 Notification & Communication Preferences Amazon task-86 (2), Amazon task-87 (2), Coursera task-182, Coursera task-203, Duolingo task-105 (2), GitHub task-129 (2), GitHub task-130 (2), GitHub task-131, Goal task-93 (2), Goal task-94 (2), Goal task-95 (2), Moodle task-206 (2), OldRed-dit task-56 (2), Quora task-78 (2), Quora task-79, Reddit task-54, Reddit task-55, Steam task-198 (2), Steam task-199, Steam task-200 (2), USAToday task-36 (2), US-AToday task-37 (2), Wattpad task-223 (2), Wattpad task-224 (2), Wattpad task-225 (2), Wolfram task-10 (2), Wolfram task-7 (2), Wolfram task-8 (2), Wolfram task-9 (2) Profile Visibility & Customization Airbnb task-107 (2), Airbnb task-108 (2), Duolingo task-103 (2), GitHub task-127 (2), Goodreads task-101, Goodreads task-99, OldReddit task-57 (2), OldRed-dit task-58 (2), OpenStreetMap task-91, OpenStreetMap task-92, Pinterest task-65 (2), Quora task-76 (2), Reddit task-52 (2) Social Safety & Content Moderation Airbnb task-106 (2), Goodreads task-102 (2), Moodle task-205 (2), Pinterest task-67, Pinterest task-69, Quora task-77, Quora task-80, Reddit task-51 (2), Red-dit task-53 (2), Steam task-194, Steam task-195, Steam task-196 (2), Steam task-197 (2), Twitch task-226, Twitch task-227 (2), Twitch task-228 (2), Twitch task-230, Twitch task-231, Twitch task-232 (2), Twitch task-233 (2) UI/UX Preferences Amazon task-89, OldReddit task-59, OldReddit task-60, Pinterest task-70 (2) User Privacy & Data Rights Airbnb task-180, AlJazeera task-179, Coursera task-183, Docker task-1 (2), GoogleAdCenter task-141, Grammarly task-17 (2), Grammarly task-18 (2), Gram-marly task-19 (2), Grammarly task-20, Pinterest task-62 (2), Pinterest task-63, Pinterest task-66 (2), Quora task-81 (2) 

Table 9: Task Categories and Associated Task IDs. Tasks with (2) have both ON and OFF state variants. We will open-source our dataset upon paper acceptance. Our benchmark comprises 138 unique website security and privacy tasks distributed across nine types. The nine types and their counts are: Notification & Communication Preferences (29 tasks), Cookie & Tracking Consent Management (21 tasks), Account Security & Access Control (21 tasks) Social Safety & Content Moderation (20 tasks), Profile Visibility (13), User Privacy & Data Rights (13 tasks), Advertising & Personalization Control (12 tasks), Data & Asset Management (6 tasks), and UI/UX Preferences (4 tasks). The full list of categories and their respective task identifiers are present in Table 9. We obtain the broad categories based on guidelines from NCSC [31], NIST [32] and FTC [11]. We also add tasks that we feel are relevant website privacy and security tasks such as Data & Asset Management tasks that deal with setting the visibility of repositories on HuggingFace and GitHub. Table 9 also consists of taskIDs that have dual initial state (both ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’) in our dataset. Out of 138 unique tasks, we have 62 tasks with dual initial state, 52 tasks with single initial state, and lastly 24 that are not state depen-dent (such as logging out of a website or adding an access token with specific conditions). 20 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

## B System Prompts 

B.1 System Prompt of our Agent Instantiation 

We adopt the system prompt of WebVoyager [19] and modify it to suit the tasks in our dataset while also adding the new actions we introduce in our agent instanation. Our system prompt is 1079 tokens according to GPT-5 tokenizer 4,while WebVoyager is 273 tokens. Our system prompt is as follows: 

Agent System Prompt 

Imagine you are a robot browsing the web, just like humans. Now you need to complete a task. In each iteration, you will receive an Observation that includes a screenshot of a webpage and some texts. This screenshot will feature Numerical Labels placed in the TOP LEFT corner of each Web Element. You will also see information about ALL OPEN TABS in each observation. When you click on links, new tabs may open automatically, and you will switch to them. You can also manually switch between tabs when needed. Carefully analyze the visual information to identify the Numerical Label corresponding to the Web Element that requires interaction, then follow the guidelines and choose one of the following actions: 1. Click a Web Element. (Note: If clicking opens a new tab, you will automatically switch to it) 2. Hover over a Web Element. Use this to trigger hover effects, reveal hidden elements, or display tooltips without clicking. 3. Type : Delete existing content in a textbox and then type content. 4. Scroll up, down, left, or right. Multiple scrolls are allowed to browse the webpage. Pay attention!! The default scroll is 2/3rd of the whole window. If the scroll widget is located in a certain area of the webpage, then you have to specify a Web Element in that area. 5. Scroll to end . Use this when you need to reach the bottom of the page quickly without multiple scroll actions. Be smart about this action, you will use it only when it is absolutely useful. For example, you can use this to find the cookie notice. 6. Scroll within popup . Use this when you need to scroll inside a modal, popup, dialog, or overlay element like a cookie notice, terms of service popup, or consent dialog. This action automatically detects the topmost popup and scrolls within it. 7. Switch tab . Use this to switch between different browser tabs. You can see all open tabs with their titles and URLs in each observation. 8. Wait . Typically used to wait for unfinished webpage processes, with a duration of 5 seconds. 9. Go back , returning to the previous webpage. 10. Google , directly jump to the Google search page. When you can’t find information in some websites, try starting over with Google. 11. Answer . This action should only be chosen when all questions in the task have been solved. 

Correspondingly, Action should STRICTLY follow the format: 

• Click [Numerical Label] 

• Hover [Numerical Label] 

• Type [Numerical Label]; [Content] 

• Scroll [Numerical Label or WINDOW]; [up or down or left or right] 

• Scroll to end 

• Scroll within popup; [up or down or left or right] 

• Switch tab [URL] 

• Wait 

• GoBack 

• Google 

• ANSWER; [content] 

> 4

https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer 

21 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

Key Guidelines You MUST follow: Action guidelines 

1. To input text, NO need to click textbox first, directly type content. After typing, the system does NOT automati-cally press Enter - you must explicitly click the search/submit button if needed. Try to use simple language when searching. 2. You must Distinguish between textbox and search button, don’t type content into the button! If no textbox is found, you may need to click the search button first before the textbox is displayed. 3. Execute only one action per iteration. 4. STRICTLY Avoid repeating the same action if the webpage remains unchanged. You may have selected the wrong web element or numerical label. Continuous use of the Wait is also NOT allowed. 5. When a complex Task involves multiple questions or steps, select ANSWER only at the very end, after addressing all of these questions (steps). Flexibly combine your own abilities with the information in the web page. Double check the formatting requirements in the task when ANSWER .6. The TYPE action can also be used to just delete the content of a textbox without typing anything by giving an empty content. 

Web Browsing Guidelines 

1. For tasks that require login and you do not find yourself already authenticated, you should try to login using default google account {DEFAULT GOOGLE ACCOUNT }.2. Don’t interact with useless web elements like donation that appear in Webpages. Pay attention to Key Web Elements like search textbox and menu. 3. Visit video websites like YouTube is allowed BUT you can’t play videos. Clicking to download PDF is allowed and will be analyzed by the Assistant API. 4. Focus on the numerical labels in the TOP LEFT corner of each rectangle (element). Ensure you don’t mix them up with other numbers (e.g. Calendar) on the page. 5. Focus on the date in task, you must look for results that match the date. It may be necessary to find the correct year, month and day at calendar. 6. Pay attention to the filter and sort functions on the page, which, combined with scroll, can help you solve conditions like ‘highest’, ‘cheapest’, ‘lowest’, ‘earliest’, etc. Try your best to find the answer that best fits the task. 

Your reply should strictly follow the format: 

Thought: {{ Your brief thoughts (briefly summarize the info that will help ANSWER) }} 

Action: {{ One Action format you choose }} 

Then the User will provide: 

Observation: {{ A labeled screenshot Given by User }} 

B.2 System Prompt of our Automated Verification 

Similar to the agent system prompt, we adopt the evaluation system prompt of WebVoyager, and customzie it to our evaluation needs, while also ensuring it is friendly to the Judge MLLM (Gemini-2.5-Pro). Our prompt is 1107 tokens according to GPT-5 tokenizer. 

Judge System Prompt 

ROLE: WebPrivSecEvaluator Bot 

PRIMARY GOAL 

You are an expert evaluator tasked with analyzing the performance of a browser-automation agent (web agent). Your objective is to determine if the agent successfully completed a specific web privacy or security task based on the provided textual and visual evidence, compared against the Ground Truth steps. 

22 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

INPUT DATA 

For each evaluation instance, you will receive: 1. Task Query : The natural language instruction given to the agent. 2. Ground Truth Steps : The expected ideal sequence of actions. 3. Result Response : The agent’s textual log describing its thought process and actions. 4. Result Screenshots : A sequence of images corresponding to the agent’s actions. 

Crucial Evidence Guidelines 

• Screenshot Trust : TRUST THE SCREENSHOTS OVER THE TEXT LOG. The visual evidence is the ground truth for what actually happened on the page. • Screenshot-Thought Pairing : Each thought in thoughts.json corresponds to a screenshot showing the page state AFTER that action was executed. Match iteration numbers to align screenshots with thoughts. • Element Identification : Valid element IDs are typically two-digit numbers. Be vigilant for hallucinations where the model cites implausible element IDs (e.g., [1078], [678]). • Ground Truth Usage : Use the Ground Truth steps as a guide for the correct solution . It is possible that the agent does not follow the exact steps but still achieves the correct final outcome. So use the ground truth to understand what are a set of possible actions that are needed to achieve the goal and use that understanding to evaluate the agent’s actions and whether they are correct or not. 

Agent Action Space 

The agent can perform the following actions. The final action is always an ANSWER acknowledging completion. Click ,

Type , Scroll , Scroll to end , Scroll within popup , Switch tab , Wait , GoBack , Google , ANSWER , Hover 

CORE EVALUATION LOGIC 

1. Strict Evidence Adherence : Do not assume actions were taken unless visible in screenshots or explicitly stated in the log (and supported by context). 2. Step Comparison : Compare the agent’s actions against Ground Truth steps to identify missing, redundant, or incorrect actions. Use the ground truth as a reference for the set of possible actions for achieving the goal. Agent can deviate but still achieve the goal. So check the final outcome based on the agent actions while using the ground truth solely as a reference. 3. Final State Verification : Ensure all changes are finalized (e.g., ‘Save Preferences’ button was actually clicked). 

DETERMINING THE RESULT General Observations & Edge Cases 

Before categorizing the result, consider these specific nuances: • Data Request Tasks : If the agent is unable to successfully complete a data request (e.g., recently requested data so optional not available currently), check the final ANSWER and the thoughts of the agent. If the agent correctly identifies the limitation and understands the task intent, this may still be considered valid depending on the context. • Element IDs (Click Actions) : Valid element IDs are typically double-digit numbers. Be vigilant for hallucina-tions where the model cites implausible element IDs (e.g., [1078] , [678] ). If the agent clicks a non-existent high-number ID, that specific action is a mistake from the agent and can impact the overall outcome of the task. • “Already Done” States : In some cases, the requested privacy or security setting may already be active. If the agent correctly identifies that the task is already completed and terminates without changing anything, this is a 

CORRECT result. • Toggle States : Ensure to compare the state of elements like toggles with the desired state from the task instruc-tion very carefully, as these elements form a major part of the tasks you will get. 

1. CORRECT 

The agent executed necessary steps and the final state reflects the desired outcome (matches the expected outcome from Ground Truth). 

2. INCORRECT 

The agent failed to achieve the goal due to any reason (navigation errors, incomplete steps, hallucinated actions, semantic reversals, or post-completion destructive actions). 

REASONING GUIDELINES 

When writing the reason field, you must adhere to the following structure: 

23 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

1. Summary vs. Expected : Summarize the actual actions taken by the agent and directly compare them with the expected outcome (Ground Truth). 2. Why It Failed : Clearly explain the specific reason(s) why the task was not completed successfully. 3. Destructive Action Check : You must explicitly mention if the agent attempted any destructive or irrelevant high-risk actions. • Examples of destructive actions include: Deleting accounts, creating new affiliations/subscriptions, or in-teracting with unrelated external websites. 

REQUIRED OUTPUT FORMAT 

Provide your evaluation as a JSON object with exactly the following fields: 

{

"result": "CORRECT" or "INCORRECT", "reason": "Detailed explanation of the actions taken by the agent, how they compare to the Ground Truth steps, and the reason for the final outcome." 

}

Output ONLY the JSON object with no additional text, markdown, or code fences. 

B.3 System Prompt to detect UI element causing failure 

Below, we present the system prompt we use to analyze the cases where the failure was due to the model not compre-hending target elements involved in solving a task successfully. This pertains to analysis addressing RQ3 Section 5.4 

UI Performance Analyzer System Prompt 

ROLE: Expert UI performance analyzer. The user will provide a JSON file containing multiple task evaluation entries. Each entry includes the following fields: • TaskID : A unique identifier for the task. • Task Instruction : The instruction originally given to the web agent. • Ground Truth UI Elements : The types of UI elements that must be interacted with to successfully complete the task (e.g., Link, Button, Checkbox, Toggle, Dropdown). • Ground Truth Actions : The sequence of actions required to correctly complete the task. These are provided for reference only and should be used to understand the intended UI interactions. • Gemini3.1 Response : An analysis explaining how and why the agent failed the task. 

IMPORTANT CONTEXT 

All entries in the JSON represent model failures. You do not need to determine whether the model failed. Your only task is to identify which UI element type(s) caused the failure. 

YOUR OBJECTIVE 

For each entry, determine which specific UI element type(s) were responsible for the failure. Use Gemini3.1 Response as the primary source of reasoning. Refer to Ground Truth UI Elements and Ground Truth Actions only to understand what UI components were involved. 

INSTRUCTIONS 

1. Carefully analyze the failure explanation in Gemini3.1 Response .2. Identify which UI element type(s) from Ground Truth UI Elements caused the failure. 3. Add a new key called WHICH UI ELEMENT FAILED to each entry. 4. The value of WHICH UI ELEMENT FAILED must contain only the UI element type(s) that directly caused the failure. 5. If multiple UI element types contributed to the failure, include all of them. 6. Do not critique or evaluate the correctness of the ground truth. Every entry is already a confirmed failure. 

24 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

OUTPUT REQUIREMENTS 

• Return a JSON list of dictionaries. • Each dictionary must contain exactly the following keys: 

– "TaskID" 

– "WHICH UI ELEMENT FAILED" 

– "Ground Truth UI Elements" 

• Do not include explanations, commentary, or additional fields. • Ensure the output is strictly valid JSON. • Analyze the entire input file and provide results for all entries. 

EXAMPLE 

If the failure occurred because the agent did not click a required save button, and the relevant UI element type was a Button, the output should be: 

{

"TaskID": "OldReddit task-59", "WHICH UI ELEMENT FAILED": "Button", "Ground Truth UI Elements": "Link, Checkbox, Button" 

}

If multiple entries are provided, return them as a JSON list of such objects. 

## C WithNav variant results 

We also present the WithNav variant tables below for reference. 25 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

Website WithNav Variant # Instances 2.5F 2.5P 3P H4.5 S4.5 5m 5.1 3Ge 

Airbnb 7 8 9 5 7 1 5 6 9AlJazeera 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1AllRecipes 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1Amazon 4 7 7 4 5 4 4 1 8BBC 3 3 3 3 3 3 1 0 3Coursera 4 1 6 5 4 3 3 0 6Docker 3 5 7 6 6 4 5 1 8Duolingo 5 1 7 5 5 2 1 4 7GitHub 12 13 13 13 4 12 12 4 14 Goal 2 2 2 4 5 1 2 1 6Goodreads 3 4 4 2 4 3 1 0 6GoogleAdCenter 7 6 7 6 5 3 6 3 7Grammarly 7 7 10 7 6 9 6 5 10 HuggingFace 8 7 7 5 7 7 6 4 9IKEA 1 0 2 2 2 0 1 1 2Moodle 2 5 5 1 0 0 1 0 5NVIDIA 1 3 3 3 3 1 0 0 3OldReddit 7 5 6 3 7 2 2 1 8OpenStreetMap 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 1 2Pinterest 9 11 14 7 13 8 6 4 17 Quora 7 5 7 0 3 0 5 2 9Reddit 6 6 9 3 3 10 8 3 10 Shein 2 1 1 3 1 1 1 0 3Steam 8 8 9 6 7 7 5 1 17 Twitch 4 5 9 8 7 6 6 4 11 USAToday 2 3 4 3 2 2 3 2 4Wattpad 2 5 6 6 4 4 5 3 6Wolfram 6 6 7 6 6 5 5 0 8Table 10: Agent performance breakdown by website for the WithNav dataset variant. Shorthands 2.5F, 2.5P, 3P, H4.5, S4.5, 5m, 5.1, and 3Ge refer to Gemini-2.5-Flash, Gemini-2.5-Pro, Gemini-3-Pro, Claude-Haiku-4.5, Claude-Sonnet-4.5, GPT-5-mini, GPT-5.1, and Gemma-3-27B, respectively.                                                                                           

> Task Category 2.5F 2.5P 3P H4.5 S4.5 5m 5.1 3Ge # Tasks
> Account Security & Access Control 16 17 20 13 13 14 15 522 Advertising & Personalization Control 16 14 17 11 12 11 9819 Cookie & Tracking Consent Management 13 13 18 18 14 36224 Data & Asset Management 555455536Notification & Communication Preferences 28 35 40 33 27 21 27 11 51 Profile Visibility & Customization 14 12 16 812 79722 Social Safety & Content Moderation 15 15 27 14 19 15 15 831 UI/UX Preferences 444453205User Privacy & Data Rights 12 12 19 13 14 12 13 820

Table 11: Agent success rates broken down by task category for the WithNav dataset variant. Shorthands 2.5F, 2.5P, 3P, H4.5, S4.5, 5m, 5.1, and 3Ge refer to Gemini-2.5-Flash, Gemini-2.5-Pro, Gemini-3-Pro, Claude-Haiku-4.5, Claude-Sonnet-4.5, GPT-5-mini, GPT-5.1, and Gemma-3-27B, respectively. 26 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks 

UI Element 2.5F 2.5P 3P H4.5 S4.5 5m 5.1 3Ge # Tasks 

Button 72 73 92 71 72 52 60 27 111 Checkbox 22 23 29 18 25 13 15 8 40 Dropdown 48 55 76 44 46 40 46 26 93 Icon 36 35 41 32 33 29 30 13 52 Link 104 107 139 101 101 73 86 43 172 Menu 5 6 7 3 5 0 3 4 7Option 39 40 65 34 44 35 38 21 77 Radio Button 15 14 15 12 15 11 8 4 20 Text Input 8 7 11 5 9 7 8 3 14 Toggle 50 53 81 56 51 36 42 24 98 Table 12: Performance breakdown by target UI element for the WithNav dataset variant 2. The best or join-best per-forming model are in bold. The #Inst. column indicates the number of unique instances in which the respective UI element is part of the solution to the task. 

Model Both Correct Only ON Only OFF Both Failed 

Gemini-2.5-Flash 21 23 5 13 Gemini-2.5-Pro 25 17 10 10 Gemini-3-Pro-Preview 42 13 4 3Claude-Haiku-4.5 21 13 9 19 Claude-Sonnet-4.5 24 12 5 21 GPT-5-Mini 19 8 7 28 GPT-5.1 15 14 11 22 Gemma-3-27b 4 14 8 36 Table 13: ON/OFF State Comparison: WithNav Variant 27 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks Step 1: Click [12]  Step 2: Click [40]  Step 3: Click [18]    

> Step 4: Scroll [WINDOW]; down Step 5: Click [67] Step 6: ANSWER – Task Solved

Figure 4: Success example for Gemma-3-27b on the W/oNav variant. Given the instruction “Disable the notifications for cake day updates.”, the model successfully navigates to the page and clicks on the Cake Day updates option and disables notifications. Step 1: Click [9]  Step 2: Click [12]  Step 3: Click [18]  

> Step 4: Click [29] Step 5: Answer- Task Solved

Figure 5: Success example for Claude-Haiku-4.5 on the W/oNav variant. Given the instruction “Disable ’show gener-ative AI on text selection’ in feature customization section.”, the model successfully navigates to the page and toggle for generative AI. 28 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks Step 1: Click [56]  Step 2: Click [64]  Step 3: Click [67]      

> Step 4: Click [73] Step 5: Answer- Task Solved Step 1: Click [55] Step 2: Click [37] Step 4: Click [24]
> Step 8: Switch Tab Step 10: Click [66] Step 20: Click [35] – Timeout

Figure 6: Comparison of Gemini-3-Pro trajectories on Twitch with (top) and without (bottom) explicit navigational instructions. Given the prompt, “Maps to ‘Security and Privacy’ in my account settings and turn on options to ensure nobody can mention me on their stories and reshare my stories,” the agent successfully completes the task when guided by navigational details but fails during autonomous exploration. 29 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks Step 1: Click [24]  Step 2: Click [21]  Step 10: Click [7]   

> Step 11: Click [6] Step 19: Click [6] Step 20: Click [7] – Timeout

Figure 7: Failure example highlighting website specific design on Duolingo (Gemini-2.5-Pro, W/oNav variant). Given the instruction “Make my profile private to remove myself from the weekly competitive leaderboards, and ensure friends streaks is disabled if visible”, the model fails to close an introductory language lesson on Duolingo and goes on to solve that instead of the task specified in the instruction. The model declares in thoughts that it needs to first solve the task before it can proceed with the user instruction. The model failed to identify the ”Close button”. 30 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks Step 1: Click [24]  Step 2: Click [28]  Step 8: Click [78]   

> Step 9: Click [70] Step 19: Click [78] Step 20: Click [70] – Timeout

Figure 8: Failure example highlighting a Cookie & Tracking Consent Management task failure on Docker (GPT-5-Mini, W/oNav variant). Given the instruction “Disable ’performance cookies’ and ’targeted cookies’, while keeping ’functional cookies’ enabled.”, the model finishes the requirements of the task but keeps performing actions of opening and closing the cookie notice in loop until it reaches timeout. 31 WebSP-Eval: Evaluating Web Agents on Website Security and Privacy Tasks TaskID Initial State Task Instruction Task Category Ground Truth UI ele-ments Airbnb task-106 dual Navigate to my account settings and then pri-vacy settings to turn off read receipts. Social Safety & Content Moderation Menu, Button, Toggle Airbnb task-107 dual Navigate to my account settings and then pri-vacy settings and turn off ’include my list-ing(s) in search engines’. Profile Visibility & Customization Menu, Button, Toggle Airbnb task-108 dual Navigate to my account settings and then pri-vacy settings and ensure only my trip type is enabled as viewable for my reviews. Profile Visibility & Customization Menu, Button, Toggle Airbnb task-111 n/a Navigate to my account settings, then to ’login and security’ and ’shared access’, and remove any other accounts from permitted accounts to access mine. Account Security & Access Control Menu, Button, Link, Link Airbnb task-180 single Navigate to the page footer, click ’Your Pri-vacy Choices’, and opt out of selling, sharing of data, and targeted advertising User Privacy & Data Rights Link, Button Airbnb task-219 n/a Access the hamburger icon and sign out of my Airbnb account Account Security & Access Control Dropdown, Option AlJazeera task-179 single Navigate to the page footer, click ’Cookie Preferences’, and opt out of sale of personal data and targeted advertising User Privacy & Data Rights Link, Toggle, Button AllRecipes task-154 single Navigate to the page footer, click ’Your Pri-vacy Choices’, and disable ’targeted cookies’. Cookie & Tracking Consent Management Link, Link, Toggle, But-ton Amazon task-190 single Navigate to advertising preferences in my ac-count and then opt out of interest based ads. Advertising & Personalization Control Dropdown, Link, Radio Button, Button Amazon task-221 n/a Access the profile icon and sign out of my Amazon account Account Security & Access Control Dropdown, Option Amazon task-86 dual Navigate to email subscriptions in my account, then to ’browse all subscriptions’, and find and turn on the email newsletters for topics ’Kindle Flash’, ’Best of Books’, and ’E-reader Newsletters’. Notification & Communication Preferences Dropdown, Link, Check-box Amazon task-87 dual Navigate to email subscriptions in my account, then to ’browse all subscriptions’, turn on the newsletter for ’Amazon Fresh grocery store weekly savings email - Southern CA’, and then turn off the subscriptions for ’Arts, Crafts, and Saving” and ’Men’s Fashion ’. Notification & Communication Preferences Dropdown, Link, Toggle Amazon task-88 n/a Navigate to my advertising preferences in my account and then select ’Delete my personal information from our ad systems’. Advertising & Personalization Control Dropdown, Link, Button Amazon task-89 n/a Navigate to my profile settings and change the profile for viewing to ’White’. UI/UX Preferences Dropdown, Link, But-ton, Option BBC task-167 single Navigate to the page footer, click ’Cookies’, then find ’How can I change my BBC cookie settings’, and disable both ’functional cookies’ and ’performance cookies’. Cookie & Tracking Consent Management Link, Button, Radio But-ton BBC task-168 single Navigate to the page footer, click ’Cookies’, then find ’How can I change my BBC cookie settings’, and enable ’functional cookies’ but disable ’performance cookies’. Cookie & Tracking Consent Management Link, Radio Button BBC task-169 single Navigate to the page footer, click ’Cookies’, then find ’How can I change my BBC cookie settings’, and disable ’functional cookies’ but enable ’performance cookies’. Cookie & Tracking Consent Management Link, Radio Button Coursera task-155 single Navigate to the page footer, click ’Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information’, then ’Manage cookie preferences’. Disable ’func-tional cookies’, ’marketing cookies’, and ’an-alytics cookies’. Cookie & Tracking Consent Management Link, Toggle, Button Coursera task-156 single Navigate to the page footer, click ’Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information’, then ’Manage cookie preferences’. Enable ’func-tional cookies’, but disable ’marketing cook-ies’, and ’analytics cookies’. Cookie & Tracking Consent Management Link, Toggle, Button Coursera task-157 single Navigate to the page footer, click ’Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information’, then ’Manage cookie preferences’. Enable ’market-ing cookies’ and ’analytics cookies’, but dis-able ’functional cookies’. Cookie & Tracking Consent Management Link, Toggle, Button Table 14: A 20-task subset of the 138 tasks (200 instances) illustrating our dataset. The Initial State is categorized as “dual” (paired with both ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ states), “single” (one initial state), or “n/a” (state-independent). Task Instruction reflects the WithNav version of the dataset, while Task Category and Ground Truth UI elements were manually annotated. 32