Title: Knows: Agent-Native Structured Research Representations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17309v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 01:20:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Knows: Agent-Native Structured Research Representations 

Guangsheng Yu 

Independent Researcher knows.academy@gmail.com 

Xu Wang 

Independent Researcher knows.academy@gmail.com 

Abstract —Research artifacts are distributed primarily as reader-oriented documents like PDFs. This creates a bottleneck for increasingly agent-assisted and agent-native research work-flows, in which LLM agents need to infer fine-grained, task-relevant information from lengthy full documents, a process that is expensive, repetitive, and unstable at scale. We introduce Knows, a lightweight companion specification that binds structured claims, evidence, provenance, and verifiable relations to existing research artifacts in a form LLM agents can consume directly. Knows addresses the gap with a thin YAML sidecar (KnowsRecord) that coexists with the original PDF, requiring no changes to the publication itself, and validated by a deterministic schema linter. We evaluate Knows on 140 comprehension questions across 20 papers spanning 14 academic disciplines, comparing PDF-only, sidecar-only, and hybrid con-ditions across six LLM agents of varying capacity. Weak models (0.8B–2B parameters) improve from 19–25% to 47–67% accu-racy (+29 to +42 percentage points) when reading sidecar instead of PDF, while consuming 29–86% fewer input tokens; an LLM-as-judge re-scoring confirms that weak-model sidecar accuracy (75–77%) approaches stronger-model PDF accuracy (78–83%). Beyond this controlled evaluation, a community sidecar hub at https://knows.academy/ has already indexed over ten thousand publications and continues to grow daily, providing independent evidence that the format is adoption-ready at scale. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Research progress is constrained not only by how quickly new knowledge is produced, but also by how efficiently exist-ing knowledge can be consumed, organized, and reused. Both humans and Large Language Model (LLM) agents operate under bounded attention and memory, yet research artifacts are still primarily designed for human consumption. Research is published as narrative documents: typeset PDFs following standard templates, with structured sections, figures, tables, and bibliographic shorthands such as “[12]”, serve human readers well, but do not expose their content in a form directly usable by LLM agents. For LLM agents, accessing fine-grained information such as contributions, methods, experimental settings, or results typically requires recovering it from reader-oriented docu-ments such as PDFs or HTML pages. This means extracting usable structure from the presentation layer: locating relevant passages, resolving references, and aggregating information across sections. The process is computationally expensive and token-intensive, especially when full documents must be re-peatedly retrieved and reprocessed. Its quality is also unstable, because it depends on prompt formulation, retrieval conditions, and limited context windows, often yielding incomplete or inconsistent representations of the same source. The problem becomes more pronounced with the rise of agent-assisted and increasingly agent-native research work-flows. The same recovery process is repeated across agents and systems: different agents, or different downstream modules, read the same paper, parse the same document, and reconstruct the same underlying content independently. This duplicated effort introduces both inefficiency and inconsistency, turn-ing literature interaction into a throughput bottleneck for large-scale analysis, collaborative research, and autonomous research pipelines. The assumption that LLM agents are a marginal audience is no longer safe: Stanford and BroadAI are co-hosting Agents4Science [1], the first open conference in which the authors, reviewers, and presenters are themselves AI agents. Human-oriented prose is no longer the only target format the scholarly record has to serve. This mismatch mirrors an earlier challenge in web engi-neering. Before content negotiation, servers returned a single representation regardless of the client. The introduction of the HTTP Accept header allowed clients to request different representations of the same resource, such as HTML or JSON. No analogous mechanism exists for scholarly artifacts: humans and LLM agents are still served essentially the same document, despite fundamentally different consumption requirements. We propose Knows, a minimal companion sidecar speci-fication for research artifacts. A KnowsRecord is a YAML file that coexists with the original PDF and binds author-asserted statements, quantitative evidence, typed relations, and provenance metadata in a schema-validated, agent-consumable format. The sidecar requires no changes to the published artifact; it composes with existing standards (DataCite for identifiers, PROV for provenance, CiTO for citation intent) rather than replacing them. Our contributions are: 

• The KnowsRecord specification (v0.9): 30 root-level fields, 23 entity definitions, tested across 14 academic disciplines from computer science to philosophy. 

• Reference tooling: a deterministic schema linter (knows-lint , seven validation checks), a sidecar scaffold generator ( knows-gen ) that ingests either the author’s manuscript source or a rendered PDF, and a unified CLI with six subcommands. 

• A comprehensive evaluation on 140 questions across 20 

> arXiv:2604.17309v1 [cs.AI] 19 Apr 2026

Fig. 1: Overview of Knows. A thin YAML sidecar (Knows-Record) supplements the existing PDF with structured claims, evidence, and relations. Agents read the sidecar for structured queries (saving 29–86% tokens) and fall back to the PDF only when sidecar coverage is insufficient. The same sidecar enables lint-based consistency validation, traceable reviews via cross-record references, and cross-record traceability through typed relation graphs. papers with six LLM agents in three capacity tiers, demon-strating that sidecar-assisted agents match PDF accuracy with 55% fewer tokens and that weak models gain +29 to +42 percentage points. 

• A review-as-sidecar workflow, in which structured reviews are themselves KnowsRecords linked to the original paper via cross-record relations and yield 4–17 × more traceable reasoning. 

• A deployed community sidecar hub at https://knows. academy/ that has already indexed over ten thousand pub-lications and continues to grow daily, providing real-world deployment evidence that complements the controlled eval-uation in this report. II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

A. Machine-Readable Scholarly Metadata 

Structured metadata for research has a long history. DataCite provides persistent identifiers and basic bibliographic fields. The FAIR principles formalize expectations for findability, accessibility, interoperability, and reusability of research data. Nanopublications decompose scientific assertions into RDF triples with provenance that form a formal claim graph, but their adoption has remained limited to specialized communi-ties because RDF authoring is costly [2]. The Open Research Knowledge Graph (ORKG) organizes research contributions as structured comparison tables, focus-ing on born-digital data rather than retrospective annotation of existing papers [3]. Schema.org and its scholarly extensions provide vocabulary for web-scale metadata but operate at the bibliographic level, not at the granularity of individual claims and evidence. 

B. LLM Agents and Paper Consumption 

The emergence of LLM-based research agents has cre-ated new demand for machine-stable scholarly metadata. Pa-per2Agent converts papers into MCP tool endpoints post hoc, so an agent can interact with individual papers through a retrieval pipeline [4]. Agentic Publication (AP) wraps papers in agent-accessible interfaces but does not define a reusable schema for the underlying metadata [5]. AgentRxiv provides a distribution platform for agent-consumable preprints without specifying a companion metadata format [6]. These approaches share a common limitation: they recon-struct structure from prose at consumption time, incurring extraction loss and duplicated effort across consumers. 

C. Autonomous Research Agents 

A growing class of autonomous systems now authors, reviews, or explores scientific ideas with minimal human intervention. The AI Scientist [7] orchestrates end-to-end paper generation including literature search, experimentation, and write-up. NovelSeek [8] and Dolphin [9] extend this pattern with closed-loop refinement of hypotheses against empirical results. CodeScientist [10] emphasizes code-based experimentation, Data-to-Paper [11] targets reproducible data analysis, and EvoScientist [12] applies evolutionary search over research directions. A broader survey of AI-generated science is catalogued in [13], and recent benchmarks such as ResearchClawBench [14] evaluate autonomous research agents across multi-stage workflows. At the level of capability organization, these systems are increasingly described in terms of agentic skills , namely reusable and composable action repertoires that extend beyond single tool calls [15]; the structured scholarly record is the natural interchange format at that level. These systems share one property: they already author and 

consume research in structured internal representations (typed claims, experiment plans, result tables, citation graphs), and the PDF is only produced as a terminal projection for human readers. When two such systems interact (one producing a paper, another reviewing or building on it), prose becomes a lossy serialization in the middle. The specification described in this report is what a shared agent-native metadata layer between such systems looks like. TABLE I: Qualitative comparison of Knows with existing approaches. ✓ = full support, ◦ = partial, ✗ = absent.                                                

> System Schema Author Claim Cross-Action Lint Valid. Time DAG Paper Hooks Check
> Nanopub ✓◦✓✓✗✗
> ORKG ✓◦◦✓✗✗
> Paper2Agent ✗✗✗✗✓✗
> AP ✗✗✗✗✗✗
> AgentRxiv ✗N/A ✗✗✗✗
> Knows ✓✓✓✓✓✓

D. Positioning 

Knows fills a specific gap between bibliographic metadata (DataCite, Schema.org) and full-text extraction pipelines (Pa-per2Agent, AP). Table I compares Knows against existing approaches on six dimensions that distinguish agent-native metadata from general scholarly infrastructure, and Table II summarizes the integration stance toward widely deployed scholarly metadata standards. The integration stance is deliberately conservative: Knows consumes identifier schemes directly, references artefact-level metadata standards via a typed pointer (external_metadata_refs ), and leaves BibTeX/CSL-JSON round-trips to tooling rather than absorbing them into the core schema. The claim-, evidence-, and relation-level structure that Knows adds has no direct counterpart in any of the referenced standards, which motivates the specification rather than a reuse of existing vocabularies. III. T HE KNOWS RECORD SPECIFICATION 

A KnowsRecord is a YAML document that conforms to a JSON Schema (v0.9, 30 root-level fields, 23 entity definitions). It coexists with the original artifact as a companion file (e.g., 

paper.knows.yaml alongside paper.pdf ). 

Core Entities. The record contains five primary collections. 

Artifacts declare the paper and its cited works with typed identifiers. Statements capture claims, assumptions, limita-tions, methods, questions, and definitions, each annotated with a modality (empirical, theoretical, descriptive, normative) and a two-dimensional confidence score: claim_strength (how strongly the author asserts the claim) and extraction_fidelity 

(how faithfully the metadata represents the source). Evidence 

items link to specific observations with numeric values or qual-itative descriptions. Relations form a typed directed graph con-necting statements, evidence, and artifacts via predicates such as supported_by , challenged_by , depends_on , and 

cites . Actions define optional executable hooks with manda-tory safety policies. Table III summarizes the required fields and the key enu-merations for the five primary entities; full per-entity schemas appear in Appendix A and in the accompanying open-source repository. 

Provenance and Versioning. Each record carries provenance metadata (origin, actor, method, verification status) and a version triple separating the specification version, the record version, and the source version. An optional replaces field points to the record_id of the previous version, forming a singly-linked version chain that agents traverse to access revision history; the old record sets record_status to 

superseded . A freshness block declares the record’s tem-poral validity with as_of , update_policy , and optional 

stale_after fields. 

Cross-Record References. Entities in different KnowsRecords reference each other via the grammar 

record_id#local_id . This enables cross-record traceability: a review sidecar ( profile: review@1 ) can link its weakness statements directly to specific claims in the reviewed paper’s sidecar. Unstructured reasoning across paper bodies (e.g., joint comprehension of two papers’ narratives) remains a consumer-side task and is out of scope for the specification. 

Extensibility. Twenty of 23 entity definitions include an 

x_extensions field for forward-compatible customization without breaking schema validation. The root object en-forces additionalProperties: false for structural integrity, while entities remain extensible. 

Profile Namespaces and Backward Compatibility. The specification follows semantic versioning: a major bump in-dicates a breaking change to required fields or enumerations; a minor bump adds optional fields or predicates without inval-idating existing records; a patch bump is editorial. Each record declares its target spec version in knows_version , and readers MUST refuse records whose major version exceeds the reader’s. Domain extensions live in the profile field (e.g., paper@1 , review@1 , dataset@1 ), which carries its own major version independent of the core spec; adding a new profile is never a breaking change. A reader that does not recognize a profile MAY still validate the core record and expose profile-specific data as opaque extensions . For forward compatibility within a major version, readers MUST NOT reject records containing unknown x_extensions 

keys and MUST preserve them when re-emitting. 

Trust Model and Threat Assumptions. A KnowsRecord is an author assertion, not a certification. We distinguish three actors: the author , who asserts statements, evidence, and provenance; the consumer , typically an LLM agent that reads the record; and an optional third-party verifier such as a reviewer, a sidecar hub, or a downstream attestor. Consumers MAY treat structural properties (field presence, ID uniqueness, cross-reference resolution, and schema conformance) as veri-fiable by the knows-lint tool alone, and SHOULD refuse records that fail structural verification. Semantic properties, including whether a reported accuracy actually appears in the PDF or whether a cited work supports the intended claim, are not verified by the specification and remain the authoring party’s responsibility. We distinguish two classes of adver-sarial behaviour. Structural corruption (malformed records, dangling references, invented field names) is caught by the linter and fails fast. Semantic corruption (inflated confidence, fabricated observations, misattributed citations) is out of scope TABLE II: Integration stance of Knows toward widely deployed scholarly metadata standards. Knows does not replace any of these; it points to identifier and artefact metadata via identifiers and external_metadata_refs , and adds a claim-, evidence-, and relation-layer that none of them expose.                                                                           

> Standard Layer Role in Knows Mechanism v0.9 status
> DOI identifier consume identifiers.doi ✓
> arXiv identifier consume identifiers.arxiv ✓
> ISBN identifier consume identifiers.isbn ✓
> ORCID identifier consume authors[].orcid ✓
> DataCite bibliographic reference external_metadata_refs.standard=datacite ✓
> Schema.org bibliographic compatible (not consumed) out-of-band JSON-LD ◦
> Dublin Core / FAIR bibliographic principles-aligned no direct field mapping ◦
> CodeMeta artefact (repo) reference external_metadata_refs.standard=codemeta ✓
> CITATION.cff artefact (code) reference external_metadata_refs.standard=citation_cff ✓
> Croissant artefact (dataset) reference external_metadata_refs.standard=croissant ✓
> Model Card artefact (model) reference external_metadata_refs.standard=model_card ✓
> RO-Crate artefact (bundle) reference external_metadata_refs.standard=ro_crate ✓
> BibTeX citation format convertible importer/exporter deferred to tooling ◦
> CSL-JSON citation format convertible importer/exporter deferred to tooling ◦
> Nanopub semantic claim conceptually aligned statement+relation graph analogue ◦
> PROV provenance aligned provenance record with origin/actor/method ◦
> CiTO citation intent aligned Relation.citation_intent enum ◦

Entity Required fields Key enumerations 

Artifact id (prefix art: ), artifact_type , role ,

title artifact_type ∈ {paper, repository, dataset, model, benchmark, soft-ware, website, other}; role ∈ {subject, supporting, cited} 

Statement id (prefix stmt: ), statement_type , text ,

about_ref , status statement_type ∈ {claim, assumption, limitation, method, question, definition}; status ∈ {asserted, retracted, superseded, under_review}; optional modality ∈ {empirical, theoretical, descriptive, normative} 

Evidence id (prefix ev: ), evidence_type , summary evidence_type ∈ {table_result, figure, experiment_run, citation_backed, artifact_run, proof, case_study, clinical_trial, survey_result, qualitative_analysis, statistical_test, observation, simulation, other} 

Relation id (prefix rel: ), subject_ref , predicate ,

object_ref predicate ∈ {supported_by, challenged_by, depends_on, limited_by, uses, evaluates_on, implements, documents, cites, same_as, supersedes, retracts}; optional citation_intent ∈ {supports, extends, uses_method, compares_to, contradicts, reviews, cites_data, background, other} 

Action id (prefix act: ), action_type , label ,

target_ref , interface , safety action_type ∈ {download, run, query, deploy, other}; 

safety.side_effects ∈ {none, temporary_files_only, persistent, external}; when safety.sandbox_required =true, consumers MUST execute in isolation 

TABLE III: Required fields and key enumerations for the five primary entities in a KnowsRecord. Every entity carries the same ID-prefix discipline so that cross-references resolve syntactically; lint rejects any reference whose prefix does not match the target entity type. for v0.9, and the specification makes no normative claim that consumers will detect it; the reference implementation treats a structurally well-formed record as authoritative at the semantic level. The broader question of how much a consumer should trust artefacts produced by an open agentic pipeline is analysed in [16], and the mitigations applicable to Knows records are consistent with the defensive posture recommended there. Specific countermeasures are discussed in §V-C and include LLM-based cross-checking of evidence against source anchors, and signed attestation for records promoted to a shared hub. Cryptographic signing, revocation, and public-key infrastructure are explicitly out of scope: a signed record can be encoded under x_extensions on provenance , but the specification does not mandate a scheme. 

Governance and Evolution. The KnowsRecord specification is maintained by a single canonical maintainer group, coor-dinated through the project hub at https://knows.academy/, and released under a CC-BY-4.0 licence that is distinct from the licence of each individual sidecar record (every record declares its own license field). Breaking changes to required fields or enumerations require a major version bump and follow an RFC process announced through the project hub; additive changes such as new optional fields, new predicate enum values, or new profiles ship in minor releases without requiring reader upgrades. Domain profiles under profile: <name>@<major> may be proposed and maintained independently of the core specification; a cross-profile registry MAY be added in a future revision but is out of scope for v0.9. The reference implementation, schema, canonical consumption prompt, and experiment harness are released under the same repository, and this technical report is itself distributed together with its own KnowsRecord sidecar. IV. T OOLING AND WORKFLOW 

knows-lint . The linter performs seven deterministic checks: JSON Schema validation, cross-reference integrity, ID uniqueness, ID prefix conventions ( art: , stmt: , ev: ,

rel: ), relation predicate constraints, artifact discoverability, and optional URL liveness. All structural corruptions (missing fields, broken cross-references, removed entities) are caught; semantic corruptions (wrong numeric values, inflated confi-dence levels) are not, motivating future LLM-based semantic verification (§V-C). 

knows-gen . The scaffold generator operates on either of two inputs: an authoring source bundle (for example, a multi-file manuscript with nested include directives, multi-format author blocks, and extended citation commands) or a rendered PDF. In the source-bundle path the generator reconstructs the doc-ument’s logical structure directly; in the PDF path it extracts claims, evidence, and citation targets via an LLM pass. Both paths produce a KnowsRecord with template placeholders that authors or retrofit agents complete, reducing hand-authoring effort to approximately 15 minutes for a typical conference paper. The experiments reported in §V use the PDF path because most benchmark papers have no recoverable source. 

Two Operating Modes. We define two sidecar usage modes. In the Knows-only mode, the agent reads only the sidecar, which provides structured context at a fraction of the PDF token cost. In the Knows+Fallback mode, the agent reads the sidecar first and falls back to the full PDF when the initial answer is insufficient. The fallback mode suits retrofit scenarios where sidecar coverage may be incomplete. 

Agent Consumption Protocol. The two modes are configu-rations of a single retrieval protocol, shown in Algorithm 1. Given a query q and an artifact a, the consumer first attempts to load the companion sidecar S. If S passes structural validation ( knows-lint ), the consumer ranks S. statements ∪

S. evidence by relevance to q and resolves the referenced 

source_anchors to obtain candidate localizations in the PDF. In Knows-only mode the consumer returns the composed answer together with its sidecar-grounded citation trace. In 

Knows+Fallback mode the consumer additionally consults the PDF when the sidecar-only answer falls below a confidence threshold τ , using the resolved anchors to localize retrieval to the relevant page, section, or figure. When no sidecar is available or structural validation fails, the protocol reduces to the baseline PDF read. 

Protocol vs Reference Implementation. Algorithm 1 speci-fies the normative consumption protocol, including the confi-dence threshold τ that governs when Knows+Fallback mode consults the PDF. The canonical LLM prompt that realizes COMPOSE is released as part of the Knows skill in the open-source repository; both the sidecar and the PDF con-ditions derive their prompts from the same document, so the only legitimate asymmetry between conditions is the content of {context} . The reference implementation evaluated in 

Algorithm 1 Agent Consumption Protocol 

Require: query q; artifact identifier a; mode m ∈{ONLY , FALLBACK }; threshold τ

Ensure: answer A with citation trace T 

> 1:

S ← FETCH SIDECAR (a) 

> 2:

if S = ⊥ or ¬ LINT (S) then  

> 3:

return BASELINE PDF (a, q ) 

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

R ← RETRIEVE TOP K(S. statements ∪ S. evidence , q ) 

> 6:

A ← S 

> r∈R

r. source_anchors  

> 7:

(A0, c 0) ← COMPOSE (R, A) 

> 8:

if m = ONLY or c0 ≥ τ then  

> 9:

return (A0, TRACE (R, A))  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

P ← FETCH PASSAGES (a, A) 

> 12:

(A1, c 1) ← COMPOSE (R, A, P ) 

> 13:

return (A1, TRACE (R, A, P )) 

§V substitutes τ with a hedging-phrase heuristic: fallback is triggered when the sidecar-only answer contains explicit signals of uncertainty (“insufficient evidence”, “unclear from the sidecar”). We retain Algorithm 1 as the specification because a calibrated confidence signal is the correct long-run interface; the heuristic is a practical stand-in pending a cross-model confidence-probe study, which we defer to future work. The knows query CLI shipped with the reference toolchain is an offline keyword-match convenience and is not used in any evaluation; all experiments in §V invoke the LLM consumption prompt directly. 

Retrieval Order, Caching, and Conflict Resolution. The protocol prescribes a layered retrieval order: coarse-grained 

statements supply the semantic skeleton, evidence entries attach quantitative measurements, and source_anchors ex-pose page-, section-, or figure-level pointers for fall-back. Consumers SHOULD cache sidecars keyed by 

record_id and version.record , and SHOULD invali-date cached entries once the current time passes the record’s 

freshness.stale_after . When a sidecar’s quantitative claim disagrees with the PDF, the PDF is authoritative; when structural information such as a typed citation intent or a cross-record relation has no unambiguous counterpart in the PDF, the sidecar is authoritative, since structural assertions are explicitly authored rather than inferred from prose. 

Review-as-Sidecar. Reviews are KnowsRecords with 

profile: review@1 . Each review weakness links to specific original claims via cross-record relations (record_id#stmt:c1 ), so peer review becomes machine-traversable and per-weakness traceable. V. E XPERIMENTS 

We evaluate Knows across ten experiments (E1–E10) covering accuracy, token efficiency, traceability, consistency validation, cross-record traceability, generation quality and generator–consumer cross-evaluation, coverage–accuracy ab-Fig. 2: Architecture of the KnowsRecord specification and tooling ecosystem. Left: the KnowsRecord object model with five primary entity collections (artifacts, statements, evidence, relations, actions) plus metadata layers (provenance, version, freshness). Center: the two sidecar modes, author-native (Knows-only) and retrofit (Knows+Fallback). Right: the tooling pipeline including knows-gen for scaffold generation from authoring sources or PDFs, knows-lint for seven-check schema validation, and the review-as-sidecar workflow with cross-record relation linking. lation, statement granularity, and matched-output protocol validation. 

A. Experimental Settings 

Benchmark. We construct a benchmark of 140 L1 comprehen-sion questions across 20 classic papers spanning 14 disciplines (computer science, biology, chemistry, physics, economics, psychology, medicine, education, philosophy, mathematics, civil engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical engineer-ing, semiconductor engineering). Papers range from 579 words (Bloom 1956) to 198K words (Terzaghi 1943) and are catego-rized into four length groups: SHORT ( <2K words, 3 papers), MEDIUM (2–8K, 6 papers), STANDARD (8–20K, 7 papers), and LONG ( >20K, 4 papers). Each question has a ground-truth answer and a sidecar_answerable tag indicating whether the sidecar contains sufficient information. 

Models. We use six LLM agents across three capac-ity tiers: Weak (Qwen3.5-0.8B, Qwen3.5-2B, local GPU), 

Medium (MiMO-V2-Flash, Qwen3.5-27B, via OpenRouter), and Strong (MiMO-V2-Pro, Kimi-K2.5, via OpenRouter). 

Conditions. Three conditions: PDF-only (full paper text), Knows-only (sidecar YAML), and Knows+Fallback (sidecar first, PDF if insufficient). Scoring uses keyword overlap with 40% phrase-match threshold, cross-validated by an LLM-as-judge (Claude Sonnet 4) on the full 1,200-answer corpus. 

Data and Code Availability. The reference implementation, schema, canonical consumption prompt, benchmark questions, sidecar records, and evaluation harness are released at https: //knows.academy/. Per-question responses, parsed outputs, to-ken and latency logs, and random seeds are committed with the repository. The matched-output PDF rerun specification (the full-scale successor to the E10 pilot), the audit-trace validity rubric, the coverage-conditioned analysis protocol, TABLE IV: E1 accuracy (%) by paper length and model tier. 

∆ = Knows − PDF. Weak models improve across all lengths; the advantage scales with paper length.                                             

> Length #P/#Q Weak Medium Strong
> PDF ∆PDF ∆PDF ∆
> SHORT 3/18 58 +8 50 +8 61 +14 MEDIUM 6/41 24 +29 73 −666 −5STANDARD 7/58 15 +40 81 −19 67 −9LONG 4/23 7+57 48 +13 52 +17
> Overall 20/140 22 +35 69 −664 −1

and the release rules that govern how experimental outcomes drive the final narrative are locked in a pre-registered release-rules document distributed alongside this report. Sidecars were generated using the knows-sidecar package (v0.9), with the v1.0 base consumption prompt used for E1–E9 and the v1.1 matched-output prompt used for E10. 

B. Results E1: Task Accuracy by Paper Length: Table IV reports accu-racy stratified by paper length, the primary analysis dimension. Paper length is the strongest predictor of Knows advantage for weak models. 

Takeaway (length effect). Weak models improve at every paper length (+8 to +57 pp), with the largest gains on long papers where PDF context overwhelms small context windows. Medium models favor PDF on STANDARD papers ( −19 pp) where fine-grained details are lost in the sidecar. Strong models show near-parity across lengths. Table V controls for paper length (2K–20K words only) and compares accuracy across 10 disciplines, broken down by Fig. 3: Agent Retrieval Flow. Rounded rectangles are pro-cess steps, diamonds are decisions, and oval terminals denote return points. Warm-peach nodes ( BaselinePdf ,

FetchPassages ) mark the two cases where the consumer escapes the sidecar-only path: structural validation failure routes to the baseline PDF read, and sub-threshold confi-dence in Knows+Fallback mode triggers PDF passage retrieval anchored by A. Olive-green terminals are sidecar-grounded returns; the legend colors match the branch semantics. This figure visualizes the same normative protocol expressed by Algorithm 1. model tier. Weak models improve across all ten disciplines (+10 to +70 pp). Medium and strong models show discipline-dependent patterns: physics, chemistry, semiconductor, and biology favor Knows for strong models, while psychology, medicine, and CS favor PDF. 

E1 (continued): Per-Model Results and Scoring Validation: 

Table VI shows per-model results with keyword scoring, LLM-judge validation, token savings, and fallback accuracy. The LLM-judge column reveals that keyword scoring un-derestimates weak-model Knows accuracy by up to 32 pp (0.8B: 47% →75%). Error attribution on 160 wrong Knows answers categorizes failures into seven types: partially correct (23.8%), scoring false negatives (18.8%), genuinely wrong (16.2%), missing numeric values (15.6%), truncated answers (12.5%), different but valid interpretation (8.8%), and sidecar coverage gaps (3.8%). Combined, 42.6% of “errors” are not actual errors. Zero hallucination was observed; weak models on PDF produce garbled continuations, while their Knows answers are structurally sound but miss keyword patterns. The Knows+Fallback condition (tested on 15 original pa-TABLE V: Cross-discipline accuracy ∆ (Knows − PDF, pp) on length-controlled papers (2K–20K words, 13 papers, 10 disciplines), by model tier. 

Discipline #Q Weak ∆↑ Med. ∆ Str. ∆

Physics 5 +70 −20 +10 Chemistry 13 +38 −8 +15 

Semiconductor 13 +27 +4 +15 

Economics 8 +38 +19 −19 Biology 8 +38 −6 +6 CS 26 +40 −25 −12 Mathematics 5 +40 −30 −20 Philosophy 8 +31 −12 −31 Psychology 8 +19 −31 −31 Medicine 5 +10 −30 −40 

Overall 99 +35 −14 −8

TABLE VI: E1 per-model accuracy (%). KW = keyword; LLM = Claude Sonnet 4 judge (correct + partial); FB = Knows+Fallback (15 original papers). Latency: average per-question response time.                                                            

> Model Tier PDF Knows ∆LLM LLM Tok Lat. PDF Knows ↓↓
> Qwen-0.8B W19 47 +29 24 75 29% 4.6 ×
> Qwen-2B W25 67 +42 25 77 29% 3.4 ×
> MiMO-Flash M76 66 −10 83 78 69% 1.2 ×
> Qwen-27B M54 54 050 46 63% 1.0 ×
> MiMO-Pro S85 71 −14 78 73 86% 1.3 ×
> Kimi S51 61 +10 66 68 70% 0.9 ×

pers) achieves the highest accuracy for five of six models: Qwen-0.8B 66%, Qwen-2B 77%, Flash 79%, Qwen-27B 84%, Pro 73%, Kimi 75%. Fallback was triggered for 10–31 of 100 questions depending on the model (Kimi triggered most frequently at 31, Pro least at 10), indicating that sidecar coverage is sufficient for 69–90% of questions without PDF access. Latency speedup is substantial for local weak models (3.4– 4.6 × due to reduced context) but marginal for API-served models (0.9–1.3 ×) where network overhead dominates. 

Takeaway (weak ≈ medium). LLM-judge scoring con-firms weak models reading sidecars (75–77%) approach stronger models reading PDFs (78–83%). Fallback mode recovers accuracy gaps for five of six models. 

E2/E3: Token Efficiency and Latency: Token reduction ranges from 29% (weak models, whose tokenizer trun-cates long PDFs at 8K context) to 86% (MiMO-V2-Pro: 2,856K →401K tokens), with MiMO-V2-Flash at 69% (1,407K →441K). Latency scales proportionally for local mod-els: Qwen-0.8B drops from 10.3s to 2.2s per question (4.6 ×), Qwen-2B from 6.7s to 2.0s (3.4 ×). API models show minimal speedup (1.0–1.3 ×) because network latency dominates com-pute time. Even where accuracy is comparable, the 29–86% token reduction translates directly to proportional cost savings for API-served agents processing papers at scale. TABLE VII: E4 review traceability (15 papers, 4 models). Trace = per-weakness traceability; WkIDs = avg ID refs in weakness section; Comp = completeness on 3 papers with ground-truth weaknesses.                                                   

> Model Cond. Comp ↑Trace ↑WkIDs ↑Struct ↑Tok ↓
> MiMO-Pro PDF 67% 0% 0.0 98% 160K Knows 67% 91% 3.7 100% 91K MiMO-Flash PDF 80% 0% 0.0 100% 156K Knows 67% 73% 3.2 100% 84K Qwen-27B PDF 60% 0% 0.0 77% 193K Knows 53% 64% 2.6 73% 117K Kimi-K2.5 PDF 67% 0% 0.0 62% 163K Knows 53% 80% 4.3 68% 95K

TABLE VIII: E5 lint-based detection rates on 15 papers. Structural corruption is caught; semantic corruption is not. 

Injection Applicable Detected Mechanism 

Omit limitation 15/15 15/15 Broken cross-refs Wrong number 10/15 0/10 Valid value Inflate confidence 8/15 0/8 Valid enum 

E4: Review Traceability: We measure per-weakness ID references in agent-generated reviews across 15 papers and four models (Table VII). 

Takeaway (traceability). PDF reviews contain zero per-weakness ID references across all four models. Knows reviews achieve 64–91% traceability with 2.6–4.3 IDs per weakness section. Completeness (measured on 3 papers with ground-truth weaknesses) is comparable across conditions (53–80%), indicating the sidecar does not harm weakness identification. 

Disclosure (prompt parity). The PDF condition was prompted to generate a free-form review, whereas the Knows condition was prompted to cite sidecar statement IDs. Part of the 0% to 64–91% traceability gap is therefore attributable to a prompt-design asymmetry rather than to the metadata format alone. The reported numbers should be read as an upper bound on the effect. The matched-output consumption prompt that removes this asymmetry is validated in §V-B (E10); a full numerical rerun under the matched protocol is scoped out of v0.9 and is scheduled as post-v0.9 work. 

E5: Consistency Validation: We inject three types of corrup-tion into 15 sidecars and test whether knows-lint detects them (Table VIII). 

Takeaway (lint boundary). Deterministic lint catches 100% of structural corruption but 0% of semantic corruption. This clean separation motivates LLM-based semantic verification as future work. A real DP-SGD epsilon-accuracy inversion error discovered during E1 confirms the semantic gap. 

E6: Cross-Record Traceability: We test cross-record rea-soning with 60 questions spanning paper–review sidecar pairs (15 papers, 4 models, 4 questions each; Table IX). TABLE IX: E6 cross-record traceability (480 total results). Ra-tio = Knows IDs / PDF IDs per question. This experiment mea-sures paper-to-review linkage via record_id#local_id 

references; it does not evaluate unstructured cross-paper rea-soning.                          

> Model PDF Acc Knows Acc PDF IDs Knows IDs Ratio
> MiMO-Pro 98% 98% 1.3 5.6 4.3 ×
> Flash 95% 97% 1.2 5.1 4.3 ×
> Qwen-27B 92% 93% 1.6 8.8 5.5 ×
> Kimi 52% 67% 0.2 3.5 17.5 ×

TABLE X: E7 sidecar generation quality. Rel/S = relations per statement. Only Claude-family models pass lint.                                                         

> Generator YAML ↑Lint ↑Stmt Evid Rel Rel/S $/sc
> Opus 4.6 (ref.) 5/5 5/5 7.0 4.2 15.6 2.2 $0.15 Haiku 4.5 5/5 5/5 8.0 4.4 15.0 1.9 $0.01
> Sonnet 4.6 5/5 5/5 10.2 4.6 15.0 1.5 $0.05 Kimi-K2.5 5/5 1/5 6.6 4.0 7.2 1.1 $0.03 MiMO-Flash 5/5 1/5 7.6 3.0 4.8 0.7 $0.001 MiMO-Pro 4/5 0/5 5.2 3.6 5.8 0.9 $0.02 Qwen-27B 4/5 0/5 3.8 3.4 4.8 1.0 $0.01

Takeaway (cross-paper). Accuracy is comparable for strong models, but Knows answers contain 4–17 × more ID references, and the IDs make multi-document reason-ing chains traceable. 

E7: LLM Sidecar Generation Quality: We evaluate whether LLMs can generate valid sidecars from paper text across seven models spanning four providers (Table X). 

Takeaway (generation gap). All three Claude-family models achieve 100% lint pass; no non-Claude model exceeds 20%. We further validate sidecar quality through a generator– consumer cross-evaluation (reported in the two paragraphs below), measuring answer accuracy when an agent reads sidecars produced by different generators. The setup inverts the structural-validity lens above and asks instead whether structurally valid sidecars from different generators convey enough content to support accurate downstream answers. 

One-shot generation. Four non-Claude models generate side-cars via a single API call with no lint feedback. Even when consumed by a strong model (Opus), these sidecars achieve only 23–50% accuracy due to hallucinated values, missing claims, and shallow coverage. Shannon (formal mathematics) scores 0% across all four generators. 

Agent-assisted generation. Three Claude models generate sidecars with lint-feedback iteration via Claude Code CLI. A 5-paper subset initially suggested Haiku matches Opus (100% vs 100%), but a full 20-paper validation reveals a significant gap: Opus 88.6%, Haiku dense 72.9% ( −15.7 pp), Haiku non-dense 64.3% ( −24.3 pp). Haiku performs well on short papers (Einstein 80%=80%, Watson-Crick 100%=100%) but fails catastrophically on complex papers (Terzaghi 0% vs Opus 80%). Dense mode improves Haiku by +8.6 pp but does not close the gap. Sonnet evaluation is pending. TABLE XI: E8 ablation (2,119 results). Eff. = accuracy per 1K input tokens. 

Condition Acc ↑ Avg Tok ↓ Saved ↑ Eff. 

PDF 59% 9,955 — 5.9 Full sidecar 59% 4,463 55% 13.2 

−relations 58% 3,998 60% 14.5 

−evidence 57% 3,057 69% 18.6 Stmts-only 52% 693 93% 75.0 

TABLE XII: E9 statement granularity ablation. Accuracy (%) for original ( ∼7 stmts) vs dense (15–25 stmts) sidecars across four model tiers. ∆ = dense − original.                                                    

> 0.8B 2B Medium Strong Paper Orig Dense Orig Dense Orig Dense Orig Dense Gödel 40 100 60 100 60 100 60 100
> Shannon 40 60 20 40 20 80 20 60
> Kahneman 38 38 75 50 63 88 38 75
> Semmelweis 20 020 60 80 100 60 80
> Gettier 63 63 63 75 63 63 63 75

Takeaway (cross-evaluation). Agent-assisted genera-tion ensures structural validity (lint pass) but does not guarantee content completeness. Cheaper models extract less substance from complex papers. For large-scale generation, Opus remains the quality leader; Haiku is viable only for short or structurally simple papers. 

E8: Coverage–Accuracy–Token Ablation: We ablate sidecar components to map the accuracy–token Pareto frontier (15 papers, 4 models, 5 conditions, 2,119 results; Table XI). Dropping relations costs just 1 pp: relations aid traceability (E4, E6), not comprehension. Dropping evidence costs 2 pp, reflecting the value of numeric observations. Statements-only retains 88% of full-sidecar accuracy at 7% of PDF tokens. The aggregate hides model-level divergence: Kimi-K2.5 rises 27% (PDF) → 38% (sidecar), while MiMO-V2-Pro (73% →69%), Flash (71% →69%), and Qwen-27B (67% →61%) slightly pre-fer PDF. 

Takeaway (Pareto frontier). Full sidecar matches PDF accuracy (59%) with 55% fewer tokens. Statements-only retains 88% of accuracy with 93% fewer tokens, achieving 12.7 × higher token efficiency than PDF. 

E9: Statement Granularity Ablation: The preceding experi-ments use sidecars with uniform granularity ( ∼7 statements per paper). To test whether poor performance on certain disciplines reflects YAML representation limits or insufficient coverage, we created dense sidecar variants (15–25 statements) for eight underperforming papers, targeting questions previ-ously marked sidecar_answerable: false .Dense sidecars improve accuracy for medium and strong models on most papers (+13 to +60 pp where improvement occurs), with Gödel reaching 100% across all four tiers. For weak models, dense sidecars help where the additional statements cover previously missing content (Gödel: +60 pp for 0.8B) but show no benefit when the paper’s reasoning structure exceeds model capacity (Kahneman: 0 pp for 0.8B). Comparing token consumption across all three representations: non-dense sidecars save 77% of tokens versus PDF (avg. 4.7K vs 19.9K), dense sidecars save 51% (avg. 9.7K vs 19.9K), while delivering +25 pp accuracy over non-dense for medium models. Short papers ( <2K words) are an exception where schema overhead makes the sidecar larger than the PDF itself. 

Takeaway (Granularity). Sidecar effectiveness is driven primarily by statement granularity, not YAML format limitations. Dense sidecars eliminate discipline-specific performance gaps for medium and strong mod-els. The uniform ∼7-statement template used in E1–E8 was a generation artifact, not a specification constraint. We additionally test whether dense sidecars benefit from PDF fallback (E9b). Across 16 paper–model combinations (8 papers × 2 models), fallback improves accuracy in only 3 cases (Kahneman/Flash +12.5 pp, Shannon/Flash +20 pp, Semmelweis/Kimi +20 pp) while hurting in 2 cases where hedging detection triggers incorrectly on verbose but correct answers. Dense sidecars are sufficiently self-contained that the fallback mechanism adds latency without reliable benefit. 

E10: Matched-Output Protocol Validation: To separate the metadata-format effect from prompt-design asymmetries noted in E4, we introduce the matched-output consumption prompt, in which both the Knows and the PDF conditions emit a single JSON object with per-claim verbatim quotes and page numbers. The v0.9 release ships this experiment at pilot scale: 10 questions across three strong consumers (MiMO-V2-Flash, Claude Opus, Kimi-K2.5) in both conditions, for a total of 60 cells. TABLE XIII: E10 pilot gate check. Thresholds (parse-rate 

≥95%, page-echo ≥90%, quote-verbatim ≥80%) are locked in the pre-registered release-rules document before the run.                     

> Consumer OK/20 Parse Page-echo Quote-verbatim
> Kimi-K2.5 20/20 100% 100% 100% MiMO-V2-Flash 20/20 100% 100% 95% Claude Opus 20/20 100% 100% 95% Pooled 60/60 100% 100% 97%

All three consumers pass every gate. The 5% non-verbatim cases on Flash and Opus are minor punctuation or formula-rendering variants that match under Unicode normalization. The status distribution for Opus (14 answer , 3 abstain ,2 not_found , 1 partial ) demonstrates the safety prop-erty of Algorithm 1: when the sidecar does not support the question, the consumer honestly refuses rather than fabri-cating an answer, and Knows+Fallback then defers to the PDF (Appendix C, Example 2). The pilot validates that the matched-output protocol is reliably executable on heteroge-neous consumer stacks. A full 840-call rerun (140 questions 

× 3 consumers × 2 conditions) to produce numerical accuracy deltas versus E1/E4 is explicit future work and is scoped out of the v0.9 release; its release rules and outcome–action decision tree are pre-registered in the release-rules document distributed alongside this report. 

C. Discussion and Analysis Structural vs. Semantic Verification: E5 reveals a clean capability boundary. Deterministic lint catches all structural corruption because entity removal breaks cross-reference in-tegrity against the schema graph. Semantic corruption (wrong numbers, inflated confidence) yields schema-valid records and needs future LLM-based verification; the DP-SGD epsilon-accuracy inversion in E1, where a hand-curated sidecar mis-mapped a value, confirms this in practice. Structured malice is thus more dangerous than ambiguous prose—a schema-valid sidecar with fabricated numbers could automate misinforma-tion at scale—motivating the two-layer verification design. 

When Does Knows Help?: The interaction between paper length and model capacity determines when sidecar-based retrieval outperforms direct PDF reading. For weak models (0.8B–2B), the sidecar provides a structured, token-efficient representation that compensates for limited context windows at all paper lengths. Weak models produce garbled continuations on long PDFs (not wrong answers, but degenerate output), making the PDF baseline a test of context-length capability rather than comprehension. For medium and strong models, the sidecar matches accuracy on short-to-medium papers while saving 35–86% tokens, but loses fine-grained details present only in the full text of longer papers. The fallback mode recovers this gap: five of six models achieve their highest accuracy in the Knows+Fallback condition. Question difficulty stratification across five tiers reveals distinct patterns. Factual-detailed questions (43 of 140, re-quiring multi-sentence factual answers) represent the sweet spot where all model tiers benefit (weak +30 pp, medium +9 pp, strong +21 pp). Factual-numeric questions (14 of 140) show the largest weak-model gains (+46 pp) but no benefit for strong models that locate numbers directly in PDFs. Reasoning questions (23 of 140) show consistent gains across all tiers (weak +39 pp, medium +7 pp, strong +7 pp), suggesting that the sidecar’s pre-extracted claim-evidence structure reduces inference burden even for capable models. 

Limitations: All sidecars and benchmark questions were authored by the same LLM (Claude Opus), creating circular evaluation bias. The E1–E8 sidecars also use a uniform ∼7-statement template regardless of paper complexity, which E9 shows underestimates optimal granularity for complex papers by up to 57 pp. Numeric questions mitigate this concern because their ground truth is objectively verifiable from the source text. The keyword scoring method underestimates accuracy by up to 32 percentage points for weak models, as confirmed by the LLM-judge experiment; we report both scores throughout. All 20 papers are well-known classics; modern papers with supplementary materials, code reposito-ries, and multi-part structures remain untested. The evaluation covers six models from three providers; five additional models were tested (Qwen3.5-9B, Gemma-3-1B, Qwen3-1.7B, LFM-2.5-1.2B, LFM-2.5-1.2B-Think) but excluded due to insuffi-cient paper coverage for fair comparison. Other architectures (Llama, Gemini, GPT) are not tested. Only English-language papers are included (four originally in German, evaluated in English translation). E7 uses only the first 15K characters per paper due to API context limits. VI. C ASE STUDIES AND APPLICATIONS 

This section illustrates how Knows can be used in prac-tice beyond single-paper question answering. We focus on three representative settings: large-scale literature intelligence, human-agent collaborative knowledge work, and multi-agent research ecosystems. 

A. Case 1: Large-Scale Literature Intelligence 

The first application is large-scale literature intelligence: conference analysis, yearly trend tracking, survey bootstrap-ping, and emerging-topic detection across thousands of pa-pers. In these settings, title- and abstract-level metadata are often too coarse to support method-level or evidence-aware synthesis, while full PDF or HTML ingestion is too costly to run continuously at scale. Knows provides an intermediate representation that is substantially richer than bibliographic metadata yet substantially cheaper to consume than full text. In practice, this enables workloads such as conference-scale literature analysis. For example, the current Knows deployment has been used to generate ICLR 2026 insights over more than five thousand papers 1, including trend-oriented views that go beyond abstract-level topic summaries. The same pattern extends to field-level survey drafting, conference summaries, trend reports, and longitudinal analyses of how methods, tasks, and evaluation practices evolve over time. 

B. Case 2: Human-Agent Collaborative Knowledge Work 

Human-agent collaborative knowledge work goes beyond isolated question answering: the same paper must be adapted to different downstream tasks. A researcher drafting related work wants concise comparisons of methods, assumptions, and limitations; one designing experiments prefers evidence-centered views that foreground results, settings, and caveats; a knowledge-graph builder wants entities and typed relations. Reader-oriented documents force humans and agents to re-derive these task-specific views from full text each time. Knows exposes a task-addressable intermediate representation, letting the same paper be reorganized by user intent rather than document order. 

C. Case 3: Agent-Native Research Ecosystems 

The third application is agent-native research ecosystems, in which papers are no longer consumed only by human readers or single assistants, but also by research agents that participate in longer workflows. These workflows may include literature monitoring, review analysis, hypothesis generation, experiment planning, or coordination among multiple agents 

> 1https://knows.academy/insights#iclr26/topics/en

operating in shared environments. As agent-led and agent-assisted research initiatives become more common, papers need to function not only as documents to read but also as structured research objects that can be passed between tools, agents, and memory systems. Knows makes this literature interaction modular and au-ditable, extending beyond single-agent paper question answer-ing to emerging pipelines that combine scholarly platforms such as OpenReview 2 with agent-native discussion spaces such as Moltbook 3 and shared memory systems. There, a structured sidecar is the substrate that connects document ingestion, grounded discussion, and long-horizon research memory. As research workflows become more agent-mediated, papers need to be exchangeable not only as documents to read but also as structured objects that agents can monitor, discuss, compare, and accumulate. VII. A GENT -N ATIVE PUBLISHING : V ISION AND 

TRAJECTORY 

The evaluation and the deployment evidence in this report target an immediate, tractable goal: make today’s PDF-centric literature cheaper and more reliable for agents to consume. The longer trajectory, however, is an inversion of the information flow that currently governs scientific communication. 

Today: dual-parsing is the bottleneck. Authors write papers in a format optimized for human eyes, yet an expanding fraction of downstream readers are LLM-based agents. Every agent reconstructs structure from the same prose (extracting claims, resolving citations, mapping evidence to assertions) with no shared intermediate. The cost is duplicated compute, lossy extractions, and mutually incompatible reconstructions. The experiments in this report quantify this cost: weak models burn 29–86% more tokens for equal or worse comprehen-sion than sidecar-augmented counterparts, and traceability collapses to 0% under free-form PDF prompts. 

Bridge: dual-emission from the same source. A near-term step, which this report already enables, is to emit both forms from a single source. Authoring toolchains already produce LaTeX, Word, or Markdown as an intermediate; our 

knows-gen scaffolder shows that a KnowsRecord can be synthesized from such a source at authoring time. The PDF remains the human-facing artifact; the sidecar becomes the agent-facing artifact. Publishers, preprint servers, and paper-authoring tools can begin shipping sidecars immediately, with-out altering the human reading experience. 

Future: sidecar-native publishing. The autonomous research agents catalogued in §II-C already author and consume re-search in structured internal representations, and PDF output is generated from those representations rather than the other way around. The trajectory is no longer speculative at the institutional level either: Agents4Science [1] treats AI agents as the primary authors, reviewers, and presenters of a peer-reviewed research venue, which makes the question of a 

> 2https://openreview.net
> 3https://www.moltbook.com

Fig. 4: Three phases of the agent-native publishing trajectory. 

Today : authors emit PDFs; every downstream agent indepen-dently re-parses the same unstructured prose. Bridge (this work): a companion sidecar translates the PDF into structured form, which agents consume directly while humans keep the PDF. Future : authors (or autonomous research agents) emit an agent-native record first; human-readable PDFs are rendered on demand as a projection of that record. The information flow is reversed: structure is primary, prose is derived. shared agent-native publishing format an immediate one rather than a hypothetical one. Extrapolating from that shift, the endpoint is a sidecar-native publishing pipeline in which idea 

→ experiment → typed record is the primary authoring path, and a human-readable rendering (PDF, web page, narrated audio) is produced on demand by a translator agent when a human reader actually needs one. Review, in the same frame, is a cross-record relation: one agent-produced critique linked by typed edges to another agent-produced paper, with prose rendered only when a human reviewer or author engages. Humans read rendered artefacts; the long-run scholarly graph is built directly from the structured records. 

What this implies for adoption. The three phases are cu-mulative rather than alternatives. A sidecar authored for the Bridge phase carries unchanged into the Future phase, so early deployment produces artefacts that remain useful even as the publishing model shifts. The Bridge phase is already defensible on its own: the evaluation in this report and the indexed corpus at https://knows.academy/ show measurable token savings and higher traceability on tens of thousands of papers today. Waiting for the Future phase to arrive in a finished form is not a neutral choice; it is a choice to accumulate no structured scholarly record until then. VIII. C ONCLUSION 

We presented Knows, a companion sidecar specification for research artifacts that provides agents with structured, schema-validated metadata without modifying the original publication. Evaluation across 20 papers, 14 disciplines, and six LLMs reports three primary findings: (1) weak models gain +29 to +42 percentage points accuracy from sidecar-assisted retrieval, approaching medium-model PDF performance; (2) full side-cars attain accuracy comparable to PDF-reading on strong consumers with 55% fewer tokens, while minimal statement-only sidecars retain 88% of full-sidecar accuracy at 93% token savings; and (3) per-weakness ID references rise from 0% under a free-form PDF prompt to 64–91% under a Knows citation-requesting prompt, with the portion attributable to prompt asymmetry vs metadata format under re-measurement (Disclosure, §V). 

Release status and roadmap. The v0.9 specification frozen in this report covers the core schema (30 root-level fields, 23 entity definitions), the normative consumption protocol (Algorithm 1), the paper@1 and review@1 profiles, the reference linter and generator, the canonical consumption prompt, and the matched-output protocol validated in §V-B. v1.0 is gated on three in-progress studies whose protocols are locked here: the full 840-call matched-output rerun (E10), the audit-trace validity rubric, and the coverage-conditioned analysis; their paper-level consequences are pre-registered in the accompanying release-rules document so v1.0 ships with calibrated rather than post-hoc claims. Post-v1.0 directions in-clude dataset@1 , model@1 , and benchmark@1 profiles; a cross-record replaces /retracts lifecycle test suite; LLM-based semantic verification to complement deterministic lint; an adversarial semantic-corruption probe; a community-curated Sidecar Hub; a calibrated cross-model confidence probe replacing the hedging-phrase fallback with the τ thresh-old of Algorithm 1; and live-cycle evaluation of author-native workflows in conference review pipelines. REFERENCES 

[1] Stanford University and BroadAI, “Agents4Science: The first open conference of AI agents, co-led by Stanford and BroadAI,” https://agents4science.stanford.edu/, 2025, conference where AI agents are the primary authors, reviewers, and presenters of research contributions. [2] P. Groth, A. Gibson, and J. Velterop, “The anatomy of a nanopublication,” Information Services and Use , vol. 30, no. 1-2, pp. 51–56, 2010. [3] M. Y. Jaradeh, A. Oelen, K. E. Farfar, M. Prinz, J. D’Souza, G. Kismihók, M. Stocker, and S. Auer, “Open research knowledge graph: Next generation infras-tructure for semantic scholarly knowledge,” in Proceed-ings of the 10th International Conference on Knowledge Capture (K-CAP) . ACM, 2019, pp. 243–246. [4] J. Miao, J. R. Davis, Y. Zhang, J. K. Pritchard, and J. Zou, “Paper2agent: Reimagining research papers as interactive and reliable ai agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.06917 , 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2509.06917 [5] R. Pugliese, G. Kourousias, F. Venier, and G. Garlatti Costa, “Agentic publications: An LLM-driven framework for interactive scientific publishing, supple-menting traditional papers with AI-powered knowledge systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13246 , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.13246 [6] S. Schmidgall and M. Moor, “Agentrxiv: Towards collaborative autonomous research,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18102 , 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2503.18102 [7] C. Lu, C. Lu, R. T. Lange, J. Foerster, J. Clune, and D. Ha, “The AI scientist: Towards fully auto-mated open-ended scientific discovery,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 , 2024. [8] NovelSeek Team, “NovelSeek: When agent becomes the scientist — building closed-loop system from hypothesis to verification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16938 , 2025. [9] J. Yuan, X. Yan, B. Shi et al. , “Dolphin: Closed-loop open-ended auto-research through thinking, practice, and feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03916 , 2025. [10] Allen Institute for AI, “CodeScientist: End-to-end semi-automated scientific discovery with code-based ex-perimentation,” https://github.com/allenai/codescientist, 2024, gitHub repository. [11] Kishony Lab, “Data-to-paper: AI-driven research and documentation,” https://github.com/Technion-Kishony-lab/data-to-paper, 2024, gitHub repository. [12] EvoScientist Team, “EvoScientist: Evolutionary scien-tific discovery platform,” https://github.com/EvoScientist/ EvoScientist, 2025, gitHub repository. [13] Baby-AIGS Team, “Toward automated scientific discov-ery: A survey on artificial intelligence generated science,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11910 , 2024. [14] InternScience Team, “ResearchClawBench: A bench-mark for autonomous research agents,” https://github. com/InternScience/ResearchClawBench, 2025, bench-mark for autonomous research agents. [15] Y. Jiang, D. Li, H. Deng, B. Ma, X. Wang, Q. Wang, and G. Yu, “SoK: Agentic skills – beyond tool use in LLM agents,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.20867 [16] S. Chen, Q. Wang, G. Yu, X. Wang, and L. Zhu, “Clawed and dangerous: Can we trust open agentic systems?” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/ abs/2603.26221 APPENDIX ASCHEMA REFERENCE SUMMARY 

The complete JSON Schema v0.9 is released along-side the specification at https://knows.academy/; this ap-pendix summarizes the root-level structure and provides a minimal valid record. Unless stated otherwise, every root object enforces additionalProperties: false 

so that unknown fields cause schema validation to fail; forward-compatible extension is only allowed through the 

x_extensions object.                                      

> Field Type Purpose
> $schema string Fixed JSON Schema URI
> knows_version semver Target spec version
> record_id string Globally unique sidecar ID
> profile string Domain namespace ( paper@1 ,review@1 , . . . )
> subject_ref string Local ID of the primary artifact
> title string Sidecar title
> summary string One-paragraph overview
> authors array Structured author records
> license SPDX Licence of the sidecar record
> coverage object Statement/evidence completeness
> artifacts array Papers, repos, datasets, cited works
> statements array Claims, assumptions, limitations, . . .
> evidence array Table cells, figures, experiment runs
> relations array Typed edges across entities
> provenance object Authoring origin, actor, method
> version object Spec, record, and source versions
> freshness object as_of , update policy, staleness

TABLE XIV: Root-level required fields of a KnowsRecord v0.9. Optional fields include abstract , venue , year ,

keywords , record_status , replaces , actions ,

resources , and extensions .A minimal valid record contains the 17 required fields above and satisfies the cross-reference rule that subject_ref 

names an entry of the artifacts array (the $schema URI, 

https://knows.dev/schema/record-0.9.json , is prepended by every conforming writer and is omitted from the listing below for brevity): 

knows_version: 0.9.0 record_id: 10.1234/example profile: paper@1 subject_ref: art:paper title: Example Sidecar summary: Minimal record for illustration. authors: - name: Anonymous affiliation: Independent license: CC-BY-4.0 coverage: {statements: partial, evidence: partial} artifacts: - id: art:paper artifact_type: paper role: subject title: Example Paper identifiers: {doi: ’10.1234/example’} representations: - id: rep:pdf media_type: application/pdf locator: {type: path, value: ’paper.pdf’} statements: [] evidence: [] relations: [] provenance: origin: author actor: {name: Example Author, type: person} generated_at: ’2026-04-18T00:00:00Z’ version: {spec: 0.9.0, record: ’1’, source: ’v1’} freshness: as_of: ’2026-04-18T00:00:00Z’ update_policy: versioned 

Table XIV lists only the root level. Each of artifacts ,

statements , evidence , relations , and actions 

carries its own entity schema with additional required fields (e.g., every Statement requires id , statement_type ,

text , about_ref , status ). Complete field-by-field doc-umentation is in the repository. APPENDIX BQUICKSTART WALKTHROUGH 

A KnowsRecord can be generated, validated, and consumed in three commands. The examples below use the reference implementation knows-sidecar ; the same operations are expressible in any language because both the schema and the linter rules are fully specified. 

Installation. 

pip install knows-sidecar 

Step 1: Generate. Two paths are supported. Author-native 

generation scaffolds from the author’s manuscript source (LaTeX, Markdown, or any supported format) and emits a KnowsRecord with template placeholders the author completes (typical effort: 15 minutes per conference paper). Retrofit 

generation extracts structured metadata from an existing PDF via an LLM, producing a record that is statistically consistent with the source but still requires a lint pass. The two paths emit the same schema and are interchangeable for downstream consumers. 

# author-native (from LaTeX) knows gen --from-latex paper.tex \--out paper.knows.yaml # retrofit (from PDF, LLM-assisted) knows gen --from-pdf paper.pdf \--model haiku \--out paper.knows.yaml 

Step 2: Validate. The linter performs the seven deterministic checks described in §4 and reports each violation with a stable error code, enabling CI integration. 

knows lint paper.knows.yaml # => PASS (7/7 checks) 

Step 3: Consume. An agent implements the protocol of Algorithm 1. Given the composition Compose( R, A) and a query q, the minimal consumer retrieves top-k statements and evidence, resolves their anchors, and returns an answer with a citation trace: from knows_sidecar import load, Consumer record = load("paper.knows.yaml") agent = Consumer(record, mode="fallback", tau =0.7) answer, trace = agent.ask( "What accuracy did the method achieve ""on the main benchmark?" )

The returned trace enumerates the statements and evi-dence entries used to compose the answer, together with the 

source_anchors resolved during retrieval. Consumers that operate in Knows-only mode emit the trace without ever loading the PDF; consumers in Knows+Fallback mode additionally include the PDF passages consulted when the sidecar-only confidence fell below τ .

Review-as-sidecar. Review records (profile: review@1 ) link weakness statements to specific claims via cross-record relations of the form record_id#stmt:c1 ;Section 5 reports accuracy, traceability, and consistency. APPENDIX CEND -TO -E ND WORKED EXAMPLES 

The two transcripts below are verbatim outputs from the E10 matched-output pilot run, in which a C LAUDE OPUS 

consumer executes Algorithm 1 under the canonical prompt 

consume-prompt.md v1.1. They are included to make the protocol concrete: the JSON is exactly what the agent returns, and the evidence quotes are verbatim substrings of the supplied context (sidecar or PDF). 

A. Example 1: Knows-only success 

Paper: Taxonomy of Educational Objectives (Bloom, 1956). Question: “What are the six levels of Bloom’s original tax-onomy in order from lowest to highest, and what cognitive activity does each level represent?” Context supplied: the paper’s KnowsRecord (a 17 KB YAML file). The PDF is not consulted.                                                                                                                 

> {"item_id": "bloom:bloom-L1-1", "status": "answer", "confidence": 0.98, "answer": "Bloom’s original taxonomy has six levels ordered from lowest to highest: (1) Knowledge -recall of specifics, universals, methods, processes, patterns, structures, or settings; (2) Comprehension -understanding meaning; translation, interpretation, extrapolation; (3) Application -use of abstractions in particular and concrete situations; (4) Analysis -breakdown into constituent elements; relationships, organizational principles; (5) Synthesis -putting elements together to form anew whole; unique communication, plan, or set of abstract relations; (6) Evaluation -judgments about the value of material and methods for given purposes.", "evidence": [{"source": "paper", "page": 0, "quote": "(1) Knowledge, (2) Comprehension, (3) Application, (4) Analysis, (5) Synthesis, and (6) Evaluation", "support": "direct" }, {"source": "paper", "page": 0, "quote": "Knowledge -recall of specifics, universals, methods, processes, patterns, structures, or settings", "support": "direct" }], "reason": "Sidecar statement stmt:c1 lists six ordered levels; ev:six-levels provides the cognitive activity description for each level verbatim." }

The consumer returns a full taxonomy, grounded in two verbatim quotes from the sidecar (indicated by page: 0), with explicit provenance back to the statement and evidence identifiers. No PDF retrieval was required: Knows-only mode emits the full trace at a fraction of the full-text token cost. 

B. Example 2: legitimate abstain and fallback 

Paper: Cramming more components onto integrated circuits 

(Moore, 1965). Question: “Why does Moore argue that heat dissipation will not be a fundamental barrier to integrating tens of thousands of components on a single chip?” 

Stage 1 (Knows-only).: The consumer receives the Moore sidecar, which captures the paper’s famous scaling prediction and the economic argument but does not explicitly encode the heat-dissipation subargument. The consumer abstains: 

{"item_id": "moore:moore-L1-4", "status": "abstain", "confidence": 0.0, "answer": "", "evidence": [], "reason": "Sidecar does not discuss heat dissipation or Moore’s argument that it is not a fundamental barrier." }

This is the safety property in action: the consumer refuses to hallucinate an answer when the sidecar does not support it, preferring an honest abstention. Under Algorithm 1, the low confidence triggers the Knows+Fallback branch. 

Stage 2 (fallback to PDF).: The same consumer now receives the page-tagged PDF and answers:                      

> {"item_id": "moore:moore-L1-4", "status": "answer", "confidence": 0.95, "answer": "Moore argues that heat dissipation will not be afundamental barrier because integrated electronic structures are two-dimensional, providing acooling surface

close to each center of heat generation; additionally, as long as functions are confined to small areas on a wafer, the capacitance that must be driven is limited, and shrinking dimensions actually allows operation at higher speed for the same power per unit area.", "evidence": [{"source": "paper", "page": 3, "quote": "integrated electronic structures are two dimensional, they have a surface available for cooling close to each center of heat generation", "support": "direct" }, {"source": "paper", "page": 4, "quote": "shrinking dimensions on an integrated structure makes it possible to operate the structure at higher speed for the same power per unit area", "support": "direct" }], "reason": "Moore cites two-dimensional structure with nearby cooling surfaces and limited capacitance in small areas, enabling higher speed per unit power." }

Pages 3 and 4 in the returned evidence correspond to 

[PAGE 3] and [PAGE 4] markers in the supplied context. The composite citation trace exposed by Knows+Fallback 

records both the sidecar-stage abstention and the PDF-stage answer, so a downstream auditor can reconstruct ex-actly why the consumer fell back and which page-level evidence produced the final response. This two-stage pat-tern motivates the not_found /abstain status values in 

consume-prompt.md v1.1 and the threshold τ in Algo-rithm 1: the specification asks consumers to be honest about sidecar coverage limits and defers to the PDF when necessary, rather than silently inventing answers. APPENDIX DTHIS PAPER ’S OWN KNOWS RECORD 

To demonstrate the specification end-to-end, this paper is accompanied by its own KnowsRecord sidecar, produced by an LLM consumer running the Knows skill (https:// knows.academy/for-agents) against the full manuscript and validated by the reference linter (zero schema errors, zero discoverability warnings). The complete record is released as 

knows-record.yaml alongside the paper; it contains 15 artifacts (the paper itself plus 14 cited works), 21 statements, 15 evidence items, 33 typed relations, and 2 executable ac-tions. An excerpt is reproduced below, showing the primary artifact, three representative statements (a core claim, a lim-itation, and a method definition), two evidence items (one quantitative table result with numeric observations and one citation-backed external pointer), three relations drawn from distinct predicates, one action with an explicit safety policy, and the mandatory provenance, version, and freshness blocks. 

# schema URI: https://knows.dev/schema/record-0.9. json (omitted to keep the listing LaTeX-safe) knows_version: 0.9.0 record_id: 10.0000/knows-v0.9-tech-report-2026 profile: paper@1 subject_ref: art:paper title: ’Knows: Agent-Native Structured Research Representations’ authors: - name: Guangsheng Yu affiliation: Independent Researcher role: first - name: Xu Wang affiliation: Independent Researcher role: contributor summary: Technical report introducing Knows, alightweight YAML sidecar specification (KnowsRecord v0.9) that binds claims, evidence, provenance, and typed relations to existing research artifacts so LLM agents can consume them directly, evaluated on 140 questions across 20 papers and 14 disciplines. license: CC-BY-4.0 coverage: statements: main_claims_only evidence: key_evidence_only artifacts: - id: art:paper artifact_type: paper role: subject title: ’Knows: Agent-Native Structured Research Representations’ identifiers: url: https://knows.academy/ representations: - id: rep:paper-pdf media_type: application/pdf locator: type: path value: paper.pdf # ... 14 more artifacts in the full record statements: - id: stmt:pdf-agent-bottleneck statement_type: claim modality: descriptive text: Reader-oriented PDF distribution creates abottleneck for agent-assisted and agent-native research workflows because every LLM agent must independently re-extract fine-grained structure from the same prose, a process that is expensive, repetitive, and unstable at scale. about_ref: art:paper status: asserted source_anchors: - representation_ref: rep:paper-pdf locator_type: section locator: Section 1 Introduction confidence: claim_strength: high extraction_fidelity: high provenance: origin: author actor: name: Guangsheng Yu type: person generated_at: ’2026-04-19T00:00:00Z’ - id: stmt:circular-evaluation-limitation statement_type: limitation modality: descriptive text: All sidecars and benchmark questions were authored by the same LLM (Claude Opus), creating a circular-evaluation bias that the numeric ground truth for factual-numeric questions only partially mitigates. about_ref: art:paper status: asserted source_anchors: - representation_ref: rep:paper-pdf locator_type: section locator: Section 5.3 Limitations confidence: claim_strength: high extraction_fidelity: high provenance: origin: author actor: name: Guangsheng Yu type: person generated_at: ’2026-04-19T00:00:00Z’ - id: stmt:knows-sidecar-specification statement_type: method modality: descriptive text: KnowsRecord v0.9 is a YAML companion sidecar specification with 30 root-level fields and 23 entity definitions that binds structured claims, evidence, provenance, and typed relations to existing research artifacts, validated by a deterministic schema linter and requiring no changes to the original publication. about_ref: art:paper status: asserted source_anchors: - representation_ref: rep:paper-pdf locator_type: section locator: Section 3 The KnowsRecord Specification confidence: claim_strength: high extraction_fidelity: high provenance: origin: author actor: name: Guangsheng Yu type: person generated_at: ’2026-04-19T00:00:00Z’ # ... 18 more statements in the full record evidence: - id: ev:e1-length-stratified-accuracy evidence_type: table_result summary: E1 accuracy stratified by paper length and model tier; weak models improve at every paper length (+8 pp on SHORT to +57 pp on LONG), medium models favour PDF on STANDARD papers (-19 pp), strong models show near-parity. source_anchors: - representation_ref: rep:paper-pdf locator_type: table locator: Table 3 (tab:e1_length) observations: - metric: weak_model_delta_short_pp value: 8.0 unit: pp - metric: weak_model_delta_long_pp value: 57.0 unit: pp - metric: medium_model_delta_standard_pp value: -19.0 unit: pp provenance: origin: author actor: name: Guangsheng Yu type: person generated_at: ’2026-04-19T00:00:00Z’ - id: ev:paper2agent-citation evidence_type: citation_backed summary: Paper2Agent is cited as arepresentative approach that converts papers into MCP tool endpoints post hoc, sharing the limitation that structure is reconstructed from prose at consumption time. source_anchors: - representation_ref: rep:paper-pdf locator_type: section locator: Section 2.2 LLM Agents and Paper Consumption observations: - metric: prior_finding qualitative_value: Paper2Agent converts papers into MCP tool endpoints post hoc so an agent can interact with individual papers through a retrieval pipeline. provenance: origin: author actor: name: Guangsheng Yu type: person generated_at: ’2026-04-19T00:00:00Z’ # ... 13 more evidence in the full record relations: - id: rel:method-documents-paper subject_ref: stmt:knows-sidecar-specification predicate: documents object_ref: art:paper # ... 32 more relations in the full record actions: - id: act:query-knows-hub action_type: query label: Query the knows.academy community sidecar hub for indexed records target_ref: art:knows-hub interface: kind: http locator: https://knows.academy/ safety: sandbox_required: false network: true secrets_required: false side_effects: none provenance: origin: author actor: name: Guangsheng Yu type: person generated_at: ’2026-04-19T00:00:00Z’ method: manual_curation version: spec: 0.9.0 record: ’1’ source: v0.9-tech-report freshness: as_of: ’2026-04-19T00:00:00Z’ update_policy: versioned 

The full 1 084-line record accompanies this paper and passes 

knows gen → knows lint → knows query end-to-end, validating the author-native path on the paper that de-scribes it.