Title: 2605.14968v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.14968v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 01:19:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
GraphFlow: An Architecture for Formally Verifiable Visual 

# Workflows Enabling Reliable Agentic AI Automation 

Drewry H. Morris V  Luis Valles, MBA  Reza Hosseini Ghomi, MD, MSE 

MedFlow, Inc. 

January 16, 2026 

Abstract 

GraphFlow is a visual workflow system designed to improve the reliability of agentic 

AI automation in multi-step, mission-critical processes. In these workflows, small errors 

compound rapidly: under an idealized model of independent steps, a ten-step process with 

90% per-step reliability completes successfully only 35% of the time. Existing workflow 

platforms deliver durable execution and observability but offer few semantic correctness 

guarantees, and agentic systems plan at inference time, making behavior sensitive to 

prompt variation and difficult to audit. GraphFlow is designed to close this gap by 

treating workflow diagrams as the executable specification, a single artifact defining 

data scope, execution semantics, and monitoring. At compile time, a restricted class of 

diagrams is specified to produce reusable automations whose contracts (preconditions, 

postconditions, and composition obligations) are required to be proof-checked before 

admission to a shared library. At runtime, a durable engine records outcomes in an 

append-only event log and can enforce contracts at system boundaries, supporting replay, 

retries, and audit. Swimlanes make trust boundaries explicit, separating verified logic 

from external systems, human judgment, and AI decisions. A year-long pilot across three 

clinical sites executed 8,728 cohort-enrolled workflow runs with a 97.08% completion rate 

under an early prototype without the verified-core subsystem (observed failures were 

localized to external integrations). The formal semantics and proof-checked admission 

described here are specified and under active development. Evaluation of the verified core 

is reserved for a follow-up paper. 

## 1.  Introduction 

Agentic AI workflows suffer from high error rates in multi-step processes, where errors compound 

across steps. Under an idealized model in which step failures are independent and per-step reliability 

is identical, a 10-step workflow with 90% per-step reliability has approximately 35% overall reliability 

(since  0.910 ≈ 0.35), meaning roughly 65% of workflows would fail. To reach 90% overall reliability 

under the same model, each step must be about 99% reliable (since  0.9910 ≈ 0.90). These assumptions 

rarely hold exactly in practice: real workflows exhibit correlated failures (shared upstream outages) and 

mitigating behavior (retries, human fallback), so end-to-end rates can be worse or better than the iid 

bound predicts. The qualitative point stands: small per-step error rates accumulate rapidly across long 

workflows, making traditional approaches insufficient for mission-critical applications. GraphFlow is designed to improve agentic reliability by shifting planning into diagrams and contracts, then executing 

those diagrams under durable semantics with auditable traces. 

This problem is acute across mission-critical domains. High-profile deployments in healthcare have 

repeatedly demonstrated that AI systems which perform well on benchmarks can fail once integrated 

with real clinical workflows: IBM Watson for Oncology failed to reach meaningful clinical deployment 

after substantial investment, with MD Anderson terminating its flagship partnership over integration 

problems and misalignment with real clinical data  [1] , [2] . More broadly, Raji et al. document that 

many deployed AI systems simply do not work outside controlled environments, developing a taxonomy 

of functionality failures across case studies and arguing that the burden of proof for functionality 

should rest with deployers rather than users  [3] . In medical AI specifically, trust depends on specialized 

expertise for safe development, verification, and operation. Failures in deployed systems risk eroding 

public confidence in both the technology and the institutions that adopt it  [4] . Recent evaluations 

of large language models reinforce this concern: on the Cancer-Myth benchmark, which tests patient 

questions containing false presuppositions, LLMs frequently fail to correct dangerous misconceptions, 

making them unreliable for unsupervised clinical use  [5] . Healthcare chatbots in particular require careful 

attention to human-AI interaction design and transparency, not just model accuracy  [6] . The same 

classes of failure, legacy system integration, data quality gaps, and misaligned assumptions between 

automated and human steps, recur across customer service, manufacturing, and logistics deployments 

[3] , and have surfaced publicly in incidents such as airline chatbot misinformation that produced legal 

liability when a tribunal held the carrier responsible for its chatbot’s incorrect refund statements  [7] .

These failures demonstrate that agentic AI workflows require additional verification, monitoring, and 

integration capabilities to operate safely in mission-critical deployments where accuracy is paramount 

and errors can have severe consequences. A fundamental issue is that many agentic workflows are non-

deterministic: given the same inputs, they may produce different outputs due to AI model variability, 

prompting inconsistencies, or stochastic decision-making. This non-determinism makes verification, 

debugging, and reliability assurance extremely difficult. Determinism improves reproducibility and 

debugging, but it does not by itself imply semantic correctness or domain validity. Traditional low-

code platforms validate workflows at runtime, creating additional risks when deploying AI-generated 

workflows in critical domains. 

For agentic AI, the reliability gap is often a planning gap. Agents must infer multi-step processes from 

natural language, choose tools, sequence actions, and recover from failures, making behavior sensitive 

to prompt variation, model stochasticity, and implicit assumptions. In GraphFlow, agent actions 

are constrained to authoring, selecting, parameterizing, and launching pre-approved workflows, while 

execution is performed by the workflow runtime. This shifts agentic work from ad hoc tool-call planning 

to workflow authoring and invocation: the agent proposes or selects a diagram, binds a cohort and 

parameters, and launches execution under the diagram’s semantics. 

GraphFlow’s architecture bridges human expertise and AI-driven automation through three intercon -

nected pillars. The core insight is that humans and AI have complementary strengths: humans excel at 

strategic judgment, contextual understanding, and noticing when something is wrong at a system level, 

while modern models excel at pattern-heavy transformation, synthesis, and anomaly detection in large 

datasets  [8] , [9] , [10] . In practice, many human-in-the-loop systems still fail because they encourage 

automation bias, where people over-trust machine output and disengage from critical review  [11] , [12] .

GraphFlow is designed to keep humans in the loop at the right layer: humans validate intent, scope, 

and process structure by reviewing diagrams, contracts, and boundaries, while the runtime executes 

those diagrams deterministically and produces auditable traces. GraphFlow is grounded in systems thinking: reliability failures often originate at boundaries between 

tools, teams, and handoffs when responsibilities and assumptions are implicit. By making responsibility 

explicit via swimlanes (runtime, external systems, AI and humans), the workflow becomes reviewable 

as an end-to-end system rather than a collection of isolated steps  [13] .

1.1.  Two Execution Modes at a Glance 

GraphFlow supports two execution modes, distinguished throughout this paper: 

• Verified core (compile-time).  A restricted class of diagrams that are acyclic and sequential, 

with verified nodes confined to lanes intended for static reasoning. These compile into reusable 

automations whose contracts (preconditions, postconditions, composition obligations) must be 

proof-checked before the automation is admitted to the shared library. 

• Durable runtime.  Full production diagrams may include long-running behavior, retries, waits, 

and controlled cycles (for example, a retry loop from a decision back to an earlier step). These 

execute under a durable engine that records nondeterministic outcomes in an append-only event 

log, supporting deterministic replay and optional runtime contract enforcement at boundaries. 

The verified core is a subset of what the runtime can execute: every verified-core automation is also 

runnable under the durable engine, but only acyclic, sequential diagrams are eligible for verified-core 

admission. Examples in this paper are labeled accordingly so readers can tell at a glance which mode 

they illustrate. Full semantics for both modes are given in Appendix D. 

1.2.  Related Work 

GraphFlow builds on substantial prior work in workflow orchestration, durable execution, formal 

methods, and process modeling. This section surveys the landscape the paper draws from, then states 

what GraphFlow adds to it. 

1.2.1.  Prior Art 

Durable execution engines.  Systems such as Temporal  [14]  treat workflows as code running against 

an append-only event log, so a workflow survives restarts, retries, and long waits by replaying deter -

ministically from the log. Durable execution yields reproducibility and operational robustness, but does 

not by itself establish semantic correctness for a given domain. 

Workflow reference models and patterns.  The Workflow Management Coalition reference model 

[15]  and the workflow patterns catalog  [16]  defined a control-flow vocabulary (sequence, parallel split, 

deferred choice, exception handling) that recurs across modern engines. These remain a useful taxonomy 

for what a workflow runtime must support. 

Cloud state machines and DAG schedulers.  AWS Step Functions  [17]  provides a managed state-

machine service with built-in retries, timeouts, and error handling. Apache Airflow  [18]  popularized the 

directed acyclic graph (DAG) pattern for scheduled data pipelines, with strong testing and monitoring 

ecosystems. Both target operational execution rather than formal verification. 

BPMN and enterprise process modeling.  BPMN 2.0  [19]  and engines such as Camunda  [20] 

provide a standardized graphical notation for business processes, widely used in regulated industries 

because diagrams are readable by domain experts and engineers alike. BPMN emphasizes governance 

and auditability, but does not produce machine-checkable correctness proofs. 

Contracts and proof-carrying code.  Hoare logic  [21]  introduced preconditions, postconditions, 

and composition reasoning as the basis for proving program correctness. Proof-carrying code  [22] 

extended this pattern to mobile code, attaching machine-checkable proofs to compiled artifacts so a consumer can verify them without trusting the producer. GraphFlow applies the same pattern to its 

automations: each one carries proof obligations that must be discharged before admission to a shared 

library. 

Agentic AI reliability.  Recent work highlights the compounding error rate of multi-step agent 

workflows  [23] . Studies of human-AI interaction document that automation bias and over-trust erode 

human-in-the-loop safeguards when reviewers disengage  [11] , [12] .

1.2.2.  Positioning 

We do not claim novelty in durable execution, retries, timers, human-in-the-loop steps, or visual work -

flow modeling. GraphFlow’s contribution is treating diagrams as executable specifications that generate 

both reviewable artifacts  and  machine-checkable proof obligations, making workflows simultaneously 

operational and verifiable. 

Concretely, GraphFlow contributes: 

• Diagram-as-specification : a single source of truth for workflow structure, execution semantics, 

and monitoring, reducing diagram-code drift. 

• Two modes of correctness guarantees : compile-time verification for reusable automations, 

and runtime enforcement through durable execution with deterministic replay. 

• Generated artifacts : reviewable, versioned code and tests suitable for standard engineering 

workflows, enabling code review and integration with existing development practices. 

• Proof artifacts : machine-checkable proof obligations for each automation, validated by a proof 

assistant, ensuring correctness claims are backed by formal verification. 

• Contract-first composition : requires /ensures  and composition checking as first-class workflow 

constructs, enabling safe reuse and composition of verified automations. 

• Agentic workflow grounding : workflows are first-class executable artifacts that agents select 

and execute, reducing prompt-level variability by moving process structure into diagrams, con -

tracts, and durable semantics. 

GraphFlow differs from existing workflow systems primarily in what is treated as authoritative, what 

is verified, and how boundary assumptions are modeled. It shifts the comparison axis in three ways: 

• Proof-carrying workflow automations  [22] : a restricted subset of diagrams compiles into 

reusable workflow automations with explicit  requires /ensures , generated code and tests, and 

machine-checkable proof obligations that must be satisfied before admission to the automation 

library. 

• Contract-checked composition : composition is treated as a compile-time correctness problem, 

where postconditions must imply downstream preconditions, enabling reuse with preserved 

assumptions rather than informal handoffs. 

• Explicit boundary modeling : swimlanes act as verification-relevant metadata, marking which 

nodes are eligible for compile-time reasoning and which interactions are external or human 

assumptions subject to runtime enforcement and audit. Formally, swimlanes are represented by 

a labeling function  𝜆  : 𝑉  → 𝐿  from diagram nodes to lanes (see Appendix D.3). Comparison Table 

System  Execution  Verification 

Temporal  [14]  Durable replay  Reproducibility + durability 

AWS Step Functions  [17]  Managed state machine  Operational guarantees 

Apache Airflow  [18]  Scheduled DAG runs  Testing/monitoring culture 

BPMN engines  [19] , [20]  Token-flow/state  Governance + auditability 

GraphFlow (this paper)  Verified generation + durable 

runtime 

Formal specifications + formal 

verification 

Deterministic replay and durability provide reproducibility and strong operational behavior. Formal 

verification provides semantic guarantees relative to a specification (contracts, semantics, and proof 

obligations). GraphFlow treats these as complementary: determinism supports debugging and auditabil -

ity, while verification supports correctness claims. 

1.3.  Three Pillars of GraphFlow 

GraphFlow’s architecture addresses reliability through three interconnected pillars, each preventing 

specific failure modes in agentic AI workflows. 

1.3.1.  Cohort Search 

Cohort search fixes the execution boundary by selecting an auditable data scope. The data lake archi -

tecture enables graph-based search to identify precise cohorts matching workflow criteria using inclusion 

and exclusion criteria (entities with/without specific tags). This tag-based approach reduces the risk 

of executing on the wrong dataset by making cohort selection explicit, auditable, and reviewable. For 

agentic AI, this shifts data-scope selection from implicit prompting to a reusable definition that can be 

reviewed and monitored. 

Intuitively, a cohort is just “the set of resources matching a query”, for example, “all sales reports 

scheduled but not yet completed in FY 2025.” The formalism below names the pieces so we can reason 

about them precisely. 

A cohort  Θ is the result of a query over the universe of tenant resources  Ξ. A query  𝑄  ∈ ℚ is a pair 

(𝜌 , Φ) selecting resources of a given resource type  𝜌  (drawn from the set of types  ΣΞ) that match a set 

of filters  Φ, and evaluates to a cohort  Θ ⊆ Ξ via the evaluation function  𝑞 :

𝑄  = (𝜌 , Φ), 𝑞  : 𝑄  → Θ, Θ ⊆ Ξ

Below is an example written in GraphFlow Language (GFL), our text-based language for defining core 

constructs:                        

> query "Sales Reports Pending" :
> description :|
> Pending sales reports for FY 2025
> resource-type ::report
> ext-type :"SalesReport "
> filters :
> -with ::scheduled
> -without ::completed
> -field ::date1
> operator ::gte value :"2025-01-01 "
> -field ::date1
> operator ::lt
> value :"2026-01-01 "

1.3.2.  Formal Automation 

Formal automation executes workflow diagrams under a formal semantics, compiling them into 

reusable automations with verified contracts and checked composition. Deterministic replay supports 

reproducibility, but correctness derives from contracts and verification. 

Intuitively, a GraphFlow diagram is a directed graph whose nodes are workflow steps (tasks, decisions, 

external calls, etc.) and whose edges are sequential or control-flow transitions, annotated with metadata 

such as swimlane assignment, node type, and action bindings. A compiler converts diagrams that meet 

the structural restrictions (acyclic, sequential, verified nodes in verifier-eligible lanes) into reusable 

automations with machine-checked contracts. The notation below names these pieces. 

A compiler  𝒞︀  maps a compilable diagram  𝐷  (drawn from the admissible set  𝔻 𝑐 ) to an automation 

𝐴 . Each diagram consists of a directed graph  𝐺  = (𝑉  , 𝐸 ) with nodes  𝑉  and edges  𝐸 , together with a 

tuple of metadata assignments  𝜇  for swimlane, node type, layout, and action bindings. See Appendix 

D.3 for the formal definition: 

𝐴  =𝒞︀  (𝐷 ), 𝐷  ∈ 𝔻 𝑐 , 𝐷  = (𝐺 , 𝜇 ), 𝐺  = (𝑉  , 𝐸 )

The executable artifacts in the GraphFlow runtime are the diagrams  𝔻 , integrations  𝕀 , and automations 

𝔸 :

𝕏  = 𝔻  ∪ 𝕀  ∪ 𝔸 

A trigger  𝐾  = (⨀, Ω) pairs an executable artifact  ⨀ ∈ 𝕏  with a binding  Ω whose source cohort is  Θ

and whose call target is a diagram  𝐷  (that is,  Ωsource  = Θ and  Ωcalls  = 𝐷 ). The trigger invokes its target 

for each member  𝜉  of the cohort: 

∀𝜉  ∈ Θ : calls (⨀)

Below is an example of a  runtime-mode  diagram written in GFL. Note the back-edge from the decision 

on line 4 ( :no--> 1) that routes rejected reports back to the start. Diagrams with such cycles execute 

under the durable runtime but are not eligible for compile-time verified-core admission, which requires 

acyclicity (see “Verification Model”). A smaller acyclic example suitable for verification is provided in 

Appendix A.                                                         

> diagram [blueprint] "Sales Report Submission Process" :
> description :|
> Process for submitting sales reports
> swimlanes :
> -"Sales "
> -"COO "
> -"Accounting "
> model :
> 1. [task] "Fill out Sales report" @sales --> 2:
> action :
> calls :(:submit-report)
> 2. [report] "Sales Report" @sales --> 3:ext-type :"SalesReport "
> 3. [meeting] "Review Report" @accounting --> 4:
> assigned :[:coo ,:sales ]
> action :
> calls :(:schedule-meeting)
> 4. [decision] "Approve?" @coo :yes--> 5:no--> 1:
> action :
> calls :(:request-approval {
> .yes :(:eq $.submitted :approved)
> })
> 5. [task] "Submit to accounting" @accounting :
> action :
> calls :(:send-email)

A complete GFL example of a  verified-core-eligible  (acyclic, sequential) diagram with contracts and 

mathematical properties is provided in Appendix A. 

1.3.3.  Operational Dashboards 

Operational dashboards validate and monitor results through visualization, providing human-in-the-

loop verification and response. Dashboards monitor diagram execution status across cohorts and use the 

same cohort search capabilities for monitoring, creating a closed-loop system where cohort identification, 

execution, and monitoring share the same underlying data model. 

Metrics aggregate query results over time: 

𝑀  = (𝑄 , ⊕), ⊕ ∈ Σ𝑀 

where  𝑀  computes  ⊕ on a scheduled basis and  Σ𝑀  = {count , sum , avg }.

Below is an example written in GFL:             

> metric "Sales Reports Count" :
> description :|
> Count of pending Sales reports over time
> query ::sales-reports-pending
> aggregation ::count

The diagram-as-specification model unifies the three pillars through shared notation: 

𝐾  →

> source

𝑄  →

> cohort

Θ →

> calls

𝐷  →

> monitor

𝑀 

A trigger  𝐾  has a source query  𝑄  to identify a cohort  Θ, to call diagram  𝐷  for each  𝜉  ∈ Θ, and metrics 

𝑀  monitor the same cohort via the same query infrastructure. 

1.4.  System Architecture 

GraphFlow separates specification, verification, execution, and user interaction into distinct components 

to keep compile-time assurance and runtime durability independent. 

Terminology: 

• formal specification  = GFL semantics + contracts 

• formal verification  = proof-checked obligations for library admission 

• durable execution  = event-log replay + operational enforcement 1.5.  Verification Model: Compile-Time and Runtime Guarantees 

GraphFlow separates compile-time verification from runtime enforcement. Formal automation supplies 

verified components that are reused by cohort search and operational dashboards. The guarantees are 

defined by what is verified at compile time versus what is enforced at runtime: 

Verified-core automations (compile-time verified) : A restricted subset of diagrams that are 

acyclic and sequential and whose verified nodes live in lanes intended for static reasoning. These compile 

into reusable automations with explicit  requires /ensures , generated code and tests, and proof obliga -

tions that must be accepted before admission to the automation library. Each admitted automation is 

formally verified with respect to its declared contracts under the formal semantics and stated action 

assumptions (Appendix D). 

Durable runtime workflows (runtime enforced) : Full production diagrams may include long-

running behavior, retries, waits, and controlled cycles. These execute under a durable engine that 

records nondeterministic outcomes in an append-only event log and can enforce contracts at boundaries 

when enabled. GraphFlow guarantees deterministic replay when all nondeterministic outcomes used 

by workflow logic are recorded in the event log. Replay reads from the log rather than consulting 

nondeterministic sources. 

The boundary between these modes is explicit in the diagram via swimlanes: nodes that cross into 

> "external"

, "human" , or  "AI"  lanes are treated as effect boundaries whose outcomes are assumptions 

recorded for replay and optionally validated by runtime guards. External APIs, human decisions, and 

AI decisions are modeled as assumptions through explicit contracts and, where available, idempotency 

protocols. We refer to these as the two  modes  of correctness guarantees throughout the paper: a 

compile-time verified core and runtime-enforced guarantees. For agentic automation, these two modes 

distinguish between reusable, specification-backed capabilities that an agent may safely invoke (verified-

core automations) and workflows that require explicit monitoring and governance due to interaction 

with effectful systems and human judgment. 

1.5.1.  Guarantees 

GraphFlow’s guarantees are semantic guarantees relative to explicit contracts and formal semantics, 

not correctness-by-replay. 

Guarantees (scoped): 

• Compile-time (library admission):  contract soundness for the workflow-automation semantics 

(Appendix D). Composition compatibility (postconditions imply downstream preconditions). 

Structural admissibility (e.g., rejects cycles). Verified-core admission requires verified lane assign -

ment, structural restrictions, and accepted proof obligations. 

• Runtime (durable execution):  deterministic replay for fixed initial state + event log (Appen -

dix D). Retry safety under stated idempotency assumptions. Optional boundary guards for 

contracts and invariants. 

Non-goals: determinism improves auditability but does not imply domain truth. External systems, AI 

and human judgments remain assumptions. 

1.6.  Human-in-the-Loop and Boundary Modeling 

GraphFlow makes human responsibility explicit rather than implicit. Swimlanes classify each node as 

runtime, external system, AI or human, which determines (1) what can be verified, (2) what must 

be recorded for replay, and (3) where approvals or checkpoints are required. This keeps judgment at 

the right layer: humans validate intent and approve boundary actions, while the runtime executes the diagram deterministically and produces auditable traces. Escalation is a first-class behavior (pause/ 

approve/route), so failures or contract violations become reviewable events rather than silent drift. 

1.7.  Design 

The following sections detail the core technical components and execution model. 

1.7.1.  Agent Loop 

We use “agent” in the standard sense of an iterative decision process that observes a system, maintains 

internal state, and chooses actions. Let  𝑠 𝑡  denote the environment state at step  𝑡 . The agent receives an 

observation  𝑜 𝑡  = Obs (𝑠 𝑡 ) and maintains an internal memory state  𝑚 𝑡 . Given  (𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑚 𝑡 ), the agent selects 

an action  𝑎 𝑡  according to a policy  𝜋 :

𝑎 𝑡  = 𝜋 (𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑚 𝑡 )

After executing  𝑎 𝑡 , the environment transitions to a new state  𝑠 𝑡 +1 and the agent updates memory: 

𝑚 𝑡 +1 = U(𝑚 𝑡 , 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 )

In GraphFlow, the agent’s actions operate over workflow artifacts, not over arbitrary tool-call sequences. 

At each turn, the agent may (1) retrieve relevant blueprints from the repository, (2) propose a new 

diagram or a bounded edit, (3) bind a cohort and parameters, and (4) launch a run (one-off) or deploy a 

scheduled/background automation. Execution of nodes is performed by the GraphFlow runtime under 

the selected diagram. The agent is not called to decide each next step unless an explicit AI node is part 

of the diagram. 

𝑎 𝑡  ∈ {retrieve , author , edit , bind , launch , deploy }

Control flow is therefore defined by the selected diagram, while nondeterminism is confined to explicit 

boundary nodes (external systems, AI and human judgment) whose outcomes are recorded for audit 

and replay. 

1.7.2.  Agent modes: authoring vs invocation 

GraphFlow uses the same agent loop in two modes. In  authoring mode , the agent behaves like a 

consultant: it helps draft or refine diagrams, recommends pre-approved automations, and helps define 

the cohort and dashboard checks needed for safe operation. In  invocation mode , the agent resolves 

a natural-language request to an existing approved diagram, binds parameters, and launches a one-off 

run. In both modes, the agent’s freedom is constrained to repository-backed workflows and bounded 

edits. The runtime engine executes the workflow. 

1.7.3.  Agent Integration: Process Selection vs Process Synthesis 

GraphFlow is designed to serve as a verified execution framework for agentic systems operating in 

integration-heavy domains. The key shift is that agents do not synthesize workflows ad hoc. Instead, 

they select existing diagrams or propose bounded modifications, bind inputs, and execute under formal 

semantics. This reduces behavioral variance by stabilizing control flow, isolating nondeterminism at 

explicit boundaries, and producing replayable execution traces suitable for audit and human review. 

1.7.4.  Diagram-as-Specification Architecture 

The visual diagram  is  the execution specification: generated artifacts and durable runtime behavior are 

mechanically derived from it. 

This architecture is designed to reduce drift and improve reviewability: • Generated artifacts are derived mechanically from the diagram. 

• For long-running instances, the runtime executes the diagram semantics directly. 

• Humans review diagrams as a first-class artifact rather than relying solely on AI-generated 

workflow structure. 

1.7.4.1.  Canonical Artifact and Execution Modes 

GraphFlow supports two execution paths, both driven from the same diagram definition. These 

execution paths are orthogonal to the correctness guarantee modes (compile-time verified vs runtime 

enforced) described in “Verification Model”: 

• Code generation : For diagrams that become verified automations, GraphFlow generates code 

(and proof obligations) that become the deployable execution artifact. The diagram remains the 

source of truth. Any change to behavior requires regenerating artifacts from the updated diagram. 

• Durable runtime execution : For long-running instances (including runtime cycles, retries, and 

checkpointing), the runtime engine executes the diagram semantics using an event log. This mode 

prioritizes durability and observability over minimal runtime footprint. 

1.7.4.2.  Deployment Modes 

GraphFlow can be deployed in two primary ways: 

• Local deployment (small scale) : run and iterate on diagrams locally as a developer tool for 

small-scale workflows and validation. 

• Cloud deployment (large scale) : run GraphFlow as a multi-tenant service with durable 

execution, operational dashboards, and tenant/workspace isolation. 

Diagrams are directed graphs  𝐺  = (𝑉  , 𝐸 ) equipped with assignment functions (Appendix D), such 

as the swimlane assignment  𝜆  : 𝑉  → 𝐿 . Swimlanes are semantic classifications (e.g., runtime, external 

system, human) that determine verification eligibility and audit requirements. Nodes in verified lanes are 

interpreted by the verifier, while nodes in boundary lanes are treated as effectful steps whose outcomes 

are recorded for replay and may be validated by runtime guards. 

Execution semantics are defined over the diagram’s graph structure. 

Node types (runtime · compile-time): 

• task  − work item · local computation 

• meeting  − coordination · external system call 

• report  − information artifact · in-memory value 

• object  − physical entity/material · persistent storage 

• decision  − decision point · conditional branch 

• queue  − ordered queue · iteration/loop 

• milestone  − phase marker · return/final output 

• wait  − delay/interrupt · delay/event listener 

• diagram  − run another diagram · module call 

Nodes may contain  subdiagrams  (nested models) for decomposition/iteration. All nodes are assigned 

to  swimlanes  that determine verification eligibility and responsibility. 

Edge types: 

• Sequential flow  − to 

• Control flow  − yes, no, maybe 

Runtime determinism is provided by the event log (see “Verification Model”). Because the diagram is the authoritative execution specification, generated code and runtime behavior 

remain mechanically synchronized with the visual model. This preserves reviewability over time and 

allows both humans and automated tooling to reason about workflow behavior using the same artifact 

(see Appendix C for a visual example). 

1.7.5.  Scalability and Execution 

Verification cost scales with diagram size and predicate complexity. Proof checking dominates when 

enabled. Runtime cost is dominated by external I/O and event-log growth (roughly proportional to 

executed steps). Practical limits are set by CI timeouts and memory budgets. Large deployments 

require backpressure (concurrency and rate limits) and observability. The runtime provides append-

only event logs, checkpointing, retries, and deterministic replay, skipping previously executed effects via 

idempotency keys. 

1.8.  Agentic Authoring, Invocation, and Trust Boundary 

In an agentic setting, GraphFlow constrains autonomy into a reviewable workflow model. Instead of 

producing arbitrary tool-call sequences, an agent selects an existing workflow diagram (or proposes 

a bounded edit), supplies parameters such as cohort inputs and thresholds, and executes it under 

the diagram’s semantics. Nondeterminism is confined to explicit boundary nodes representing external 

systems, human judgment, or explicit AI decision nodes. Control flow remains stable, auditable, and 

replayable. 

For one-off requests (for example, “Send a proposal to customer X”), the agent matches the request 

to an approved diagram, fills required parameters, and launches a single run. The resulting execution 

is durable, audited, and replayable, with the same operational guarantees as scheduled automations. 

GraphFlow treats AI as an untrusted assistant: it may propose diagrams and contracts, but admission 

to the automation library requires mechanical checks (and proofs when enabled). The boundary between 

the compile-time verified core and runtime-enforced guarantees is defined in “Verification Model.” 

1.8.1.  What is guaranteed (and what is not) 

GraphFlow’s strongest claims are semantic guarantees relative to an explicit specification (contracts + 

formal semantics), not correctness-by-replay. 

The scope of guarantees is defined in “Verification Model” and formalized in Appendix D. Compile-

time guarantees apply only to verified-core automations admitted to the library. Runtime guarantees 

apply to durable execution with deterministic replay and optional boundary guards. External systems, 

AI and human decisions remain assumptions recorded for audit and replay. 

1.8.2.  Formal model and AI authoring 

The formal semantics and theorem statements that scope the above claims are given in Appendix D. The 

paper’s high-level guarantee statements should be read as “correctness relative to the stated semantics 

and assumptions,” not as claims about the correctness of external systems, AI or human decisions. 

• AI may propose: diagram structure,  requires /ensures , invariants, boundary guards, and refac -

torings. 

• The system must validate mechanically: parsing and typing, verified-core admissibility, contract 

and composition obligations, and (when enabled) proof-assistant-checked obligations for admitted 

automations. • Humans remain responsible for: intent validation, domain correctness of contracts, and operational 

choices about enabling runtime checks, approvals, and deployment, so incorrect proposals are 

rejected at compile time or fail as explicit contract violations. 

1.9.  Testing and Operational Assurance 

• Verification establishes properties relative to the formal semantics and declared contracts for the 

verified core. 

• Property-based testing exercises the executable semantics over large input spaces, complementing 

proofs for practical coverage and regression resistance  [24] .

• Monitoring and dashboards validate distributional expectations, data freshness, and runtime 

invariants on live cohorts, supporting human-in-the-loop oversight without treating human 

judgment as a provable step. 

For mission-critical deployments, this combination is practical: proofs constrain the verified core, replay 

and logs make execution reproducible, and monitoring catches violations of real-world assumptions. 

1.10.  Failure Modes and Limitations 

GraphFlow improves reliability, but mission-critical deployments must account for failure modes outside 

workflow semantics. 

• Bad specifications: incorrect or incomplete contracts can yield “verified” behavior that is wrong 

for the domain. 

• Data quality and staleness: incorrect or stale data can drive correct execution over incorrect facts. 

• External integration behavior: partial failures, inconsistent third-party semantics, and non-idem -

potent endpoints can violate assumptions. 

• Human decision errors: approvals can be wrong. Escalation and review policies must be designed 

to manage this risk. 

GraphFlow’s design mitigates (but does not eliminate) these risks via explicit boundary modeling, audit 

trails, runtime guards, and operational controls. 

1.11.  Security and Trust Model 

GraphFlow is designed with a conservative posture for mission-critical automation. The architecture 

targets alignment with NIST SP 800-53 (Moderate baseline) control families as a design reference  [25] 

(not a certification claim). 

Trust boundaries: 

• User/UI: untrusted input. Changes are authenticated, authorized, and audited. 

• AI assistant: untrusted. Produces suggestions only. 

• Generator + verifier: trusted build step. Emits artifacts only when checks (and proofs, when 

enabled) pass. 

• Runtime engine: trusted to enforce isolation, durability, and audit logging. 

• External systems: untrusted. Treated as assumptions and optionally guarded at runtime. 

Core operational assumptions: 

• Tenant/workspace isolation is enforced across storage and execution. 

• Secrets are resolved at runtime in least-privilege contexts and are not embedded into generated 

artifacts. • Generated artifacts are treated as supply-chain inputs: reviewed, versioned, and reproducibly 

regenerated. 

1.12.  Evaluation Plan 

This paper focuses on architecture and verification scope. We evaluate GraphFlow using two comple -

mentary approaches: (1) empirical evidence from a production pilot (Empirical Evaluation) and (2) a 

forward measurement plan for the fully verified system (Evaluation Plan). 

• Prevented error classes : contract violations become explicit failures. Composition mismatches 

are rejected before admission to the automation library. Verified-core restrictions prevent unsup -

ported structures from being “verified by accident.” 

• Cost model : compile-time cost scales with diagram size and predicate complexity. Proof checking 

is the dominant cost when enabled. Runtime overhead is dominated by enabled guard evaluation 

and is often small relative to external I/O. 

• Scalability measurements : compile-time checking time vs diagram size, proof-checking time 

vs obligation size, runtime throughput vs cohort size, event-log growth vs executed steps, replay 

performance for representative workflows. 

1.13.  Empirical Evaluation 

This section reports observations from a year-long pilot deployment of an early GraphFlow prototype, 

evaluating the feasibility of the diagram-as-specification approach in real clinical workflows. The pilot 

demonstrates durable execution, explicit boundary modeling, and failure localization in practice. The 

deployed workflow is reconstructed in GFL in Appendix B with a corresponding visual diagram in 

Appendix C. 

1.13.1.  Deployment Context 

The pilot ran from January 2025 through December 2025 across three anonymized clinical sites, each 

operating under different organizational and workflow conditions: 

• Clinic  𝛼  (telemedicine practice): active for the full study period (January-December 2025). 

• Clinic  𝛽  (family medicine practice): onboarded in October 2025. 

• Clinic  𝛾  (single clinical location within a larger, multi-department healthcare organization): 

onboarded in October 2025. 

All workflows integrated with a production electronic health record (EHR) system. The pilot used 

a cohort-enrollment model in which every patient enrolled in a clinic’s active cohort was bound to 

exactly one workflow run (see “Cohort Search”). Across the deployment period,  8,728 unique patients 

were enrolled, yielding  8,728 distinct workflow runs . The one-to-one mapping between patients and 

runs is by design, not coincidence. Each reported run used the initial EHR order-creation call as its 

instrumented completion gate. Downstream clinical actions and conditional follow-up orders existed 

operationally but were not counted as additional completion gates in this metric. 

1.13.2.  Workload Summary 

Across all sites and active periods, the system executed 8,728 workflow runs (8,473 completed, 255 

errored), yielding an aggregate per-run completion rate of 97.08% (error rate 2.92%). We report three 

related but distinct rates in this evaluation: 

• Per-patient enrollment : 8,728 patients, each producing one workflow run. 

• Per-run completion : 97.08%, the fraction of workflow runs that reached a terminal completed 

state. • Per-boundary success : separately, the instrumented EHR order-creation boundary completed 

successfully in 97.08% of attempts. Each reported run contained one such gating EHR order-

creation attempt, so per-run completion and per-boundary success are numerically identical by 

construction. This should not be read as a claim that all downstream clinical or EHR interactions 

had the same success rate. Those steps were not fully instrumented as GraphFlow completion 

gates in the prototype. 

Clinic  𝛼  accounted for the majority of executions due to its longer deployment period. Clinics  𝛽  and  𝛾 

contributed fewer total executions because of later onboarding, though Clinic  𝛾  exhibited higher per-

period volume due to organizational scale and authorization complexity. Clinic  𝛾 ’s lower success rate 

reflects the same authorization complexity in a multi-department organization, discussed further in 

“Failure Analysis.” 

Failures were recorded uniformly through the durable execution engine and represent executions that 

reached an errored state. 

1.13.3.  Execution Summary 

Clinic  Period  Completed  Errored  Success 

Clinic  𝛼  Jan −Dec  6,914  73  98.96% 

Clinic  𝛽  Oct −Dec  102  0 100.00% 

Clinic  𝛾  Oct −Dec  1,457  182  88.90% 

Total  − 8,473  255  97.08% 

1.13.4.  Boundary Reliability and Multi-Step Failure 

The introduction describes a compounding failure effect in multi-step workflows. The pilot data provides 

an empirical estimate of reliability for a representative external-system boundary: EHR order creation 

completed successfully in 97.08% of attempts. This empirically grounds the compounding argument 

introduced with the idealized  0.910 example at a realistic observed per-boundary rate. Although this 

evaluation does not provide end-to-end node-level telemetry for every step in the care pathway, this 

boundary reliability is sufficient to illustrate how errors can accumulate across multi-step agentic 

workflows. 

As an illustrative upper bound, assume a workflow requires  k boundary calls whose failures are 

independent and identically distributed with per-call success probability  p. Then expected end-to-end 

success scales as  p^k. Under this assumption and the observed boundary success rate ( p = 0.9708), a 

workflow with five such calls would have an expected success rate of approximately 86%, and a workflow 

with ten calls approximately 74%. Real clinical workflows rarely satisfy strict independence and identical 

per-call reliability: failures at a given boundary are often correlated (shared upstream outages, per-

clinic authorization gaps) or mitigated (retries, human fallback), so actual compounded rates can be 

worse or better than the iid model predicts. The qualitative point stands: small per-step error rates 

accumulate rapidly across long workflows, and localizing failures to explicit boundaries is a prerequisite 

for preventing invalid assumptions from silently propagating across steps. 

1.13.5.  Failure Analysis 

Observed failures were overwhelmingly attributable to external-system behavior rather than workflow 

control logic. Common causes included authorization failures (for example, providers lacking permission 

to place orders within specific departments) and upstream data integrity issues (such as duplicated or 

deleted patient records). These failures occurred at explicit external-system boundaries and were recorded as such in the 

execution log. No failures were attributed to incorrect diagram structure or execution semantics. 

1.13.6.  Interpretation and Limitations 

This pilot reflects an early GraphFlow prototype that predated the formal specification and verification 

framework described in this paper. Workflow automations were generated from diagrams, but proof 

obligations, formal semantics, and verified composition were not yet implemented. 

Accordingly, these results should be interpreted as evidence of: 

1.  The practicality of treating diagrams as executable specifications in real-world, multi-tenant 

clinical workflows. 

2.  The effectiveness of durable execution and event logging in localizing failures at system boundaries. 

3.  The tendency of reliability failures in agentic workflows to originate from external integrations 

and organizational constraints rather than internal control flow. 

Several steps in the deployed care pathway (including clinician actions and background tagging jobs) 

were executed operationally but not recorded as GraphFlow node-level events. As a result, reported 

success and failure rates reflect only the instrumented external integration boundary rather than the full 

end-to-end clinical process. Nevertheless, these observations highlight where reliability failures actually 

surface in practice: at explicit system and organizational boundaries. 

Future empirical evaluation will measure the impact of the verified core on end-to-end reliability, 

verification cost, and operational overhead once contract-checked generation and composition are 

deployed. Together, these results reinforce the central reliability argument of this paper: even modest 

per-boundary failure rates can significantly erode overall success in multi-step workflows, motivating 

the need for explicit specification, verification, and durable execution. 

## 2.  Status and Roadmap 

This paper describes the GraphFlow architecture as it exists today: a specified design with a partially 

implemented runtime, a deployed clinical pilot, and a formal verification framework under active 

development. The sections below detail what is implemented, specified, and forthcoming. 

2.1.  Implemented today 

• GraphFlow Language (GFL) for authoring diagrams, queries, metrics, and triggers. 

• Durable runtime execution with an append-only event log, deterministic replay, retries, and 

idempotent execution. 

• Cohort search and operational dashboards backed by the same query infrastructure. 

• Swimlane-based boundary modeling at runtime, with outcomes at external, human, and AI 

boundaries recorded as audit-quality events. 

• A year-long, multi-tenant clinical pilot whose results are reported in “Empirical Evaluation.” 

2.2.  Specified and in active development 

• Formal semantics for the compile-time subset (Appendix D). 

• requires /ensures  contract checking and composition obligations along diagram edges. 

• Proof-checked admission for verified-core automations. 

• Generator that emits code and proof obligations from admissible diagrams. 

• Proof-assistant integration for discharging obligations. 2.3.  Forthcoming 

• Production deployment of the verified core at pilot sites, planned for 2026. 

• End-to-end empirical evaluation comparing verified-core automations against the unverified 

prototype measured in this paper. 

• Scalability measurements of verification time, proof-checking cost, and runtime overhead as a 

function of diagram size and predicate complexity. 

• A follow-up paper with these empirical results incorporated. 

Accordingly, the correctness claims in this paper should be read as claims about the architecture and 

its formal semantics, not as empirical claims about a production-deployed verified core. The pilot 

numbers reported here reflect the pre-verification prototype and should be interpreted as evidence for 

the practicality of the diagram-as-specification and durable-execution layers, not as evidence for the 

verification layer, which is not yet in production. 

## 3.  Conclusion 

GraphFlow improves the reliability of agentic automation by shifting planning from ad hoc tool-call 

sequences into a diagram-as-specification artifact with explicit scope, semantics, and assumptions. A 

formal specification (GFL semantics and contracts) enables verified generation of reusable automations, 

so agents primarily select and parameterize pre-approved processes from a repository rather than 

synthesizing multi-step plans on the fly. 

At runtime, durable execution provides deterministic replay and auditable traces, while swimlanes 

make trust boundaries explicit by separating verified logic from external, human, and AI judgment. This 

keeps humans in the loop at the right points, localizes nondeterminism at clear boundary nodes, and 

turns reliability into an engineering discipline grounded in explicit specifications, checkable assumptions, 

and durable execution. 

## 4.  References 

4.1.  External References 

## Bibliography 

[1]  C. Schmidt, “M. D. Anderson Breaks With IBM Watson, Raising Questions About Artificial 

Intelligence in Oncology,”  JNCI: Journal of the National Cancer Institute , vol. 109, no. 5, p. djx113, 

2017, doi:  10.1093/jnci/djx113 .

[2]  E. Strickland, “How IBM Watson Overpromised and Underdelivered on AI Health Care.” [On -

line]. Available:  https://spectrum.ieee.org/how-ibm-watson-overpromised-and-underdelivered-on-

ai-health-care 

[3]  I. D. Raji, I. E. Kumar, A. Horowitz, and A. D. Selbst, “The Fallacy of AI Functionality,”  arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2206.09511 , 2022, [Online]. Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.09511 

[4]  T. P. Quinn, M. Senadeera, S. Jacobs, S. Coghlan, and V. Le, “Trust and Medical AI: The 

challenges we face and the expertise needed to overcome them,”  arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.07734 ,

2020, [Online]. Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.07734 

[5]  W. B. Zhu  et al. , “Cancer-Myth: Evaluating Large Language Models on Patient Questions with 

False Presuppositions,”  arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11373 , 2025, [Online]. Available:  https://arxiv. 

org/abs/2504.11373 [6]  M. Jovanović, M. Baez, and F. Casati, “Chatbots as conversational healthcare services,”  arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2011.03969 , 2020, [Online]. Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.03969 

[7]  C. C. Rivers, “Moffatt v. Air Canada.” [Online]. Available:  https://canlii.ca/t/k2spq 

[8]  M. Mitchell,  Artificial Intelligence: A Guide for Thinking Humans . Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 2019. 

[9]  F. Chollet, “On the Measure of Intelligence,”  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547 , 2019, [Online]. 

Available:  https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.01547 

[10]  Apple Machine Learning Research, “The Illusion of Thinking: Understanding the Strengths and 

Limitations of Reasoning Models via the Lens of Problem Complexity.” [Online]. Available:  https:// 

machinelearning.apple.com/research/illusion-of-thinking 

[11]  R. Parasuraman and V. Riley, “Humans and Automation: Use, Misuse, Disuse, Abuse,”  Human 

Factors , vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 230–253, 1997, doi:  10.1518/001872097778543886 .

[12]  S. Amershi  et al. , “Guidelines for Human-AI Interaction,” in  Proceedings of the 2019 

CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM, 2019, pp. 1–13. doi: 

10.1145/3290605.3300233 .

[13]  W. E. Deming,  The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education . MIT Press, 1993. 

[14]  “Temporal: Durable Execution.” [Online]. Available:  https://docs.temporal.io/temporal 

[15]  D. Hollingsworth, “Workflow Management Coalition: The Workflow Reference Model,” technical 

report TC0–3, 1995. [Online]. Available:  https://wfmc.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/tc003v 

11.pdf 

[16]  W. M. P. van der Aalst, A. H. M. ter Hofstede, B. Kiepuszewski, and A. P. Barros, “Workflow 

Patterns,”  Distributed and Parallel Databases , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 5–51, 2003, doi:  10.1023/ 

A:1022883727209 .

[17]  “AWS Step Functions.” [Online]. Available:  https://aws.amazon.com/step-functions/ 

[18]  “Apache Airflow.” [Online]. Available:  https://airflow.apache.org/ 

[19]  “Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) Version 2.0.” [Online]. Available:  https://www. 

omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/ 

[20]  “Camunda Platform.” [Online]. Available:  https://camunda.com/ 

[21]  C. A. R. Hoare, “An Axiomatic Basis for Computer Programming,”  Communications of the ACM ,

vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 576–583, 1969, doi:  10.1145/363235.363259 .

[22]  G. C. Necula, “Proof-Carrying Code,” in  Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT 

Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL) , ACM, 1997, pp. 106–119. doi: 

10.1145/263699.263712 .

[23]  M. Kleppmann, “Prediction: AI will make formal verification go mainstream.” [Online]. Available: 

https://martin.kleppmann.com/2025/12/08/ai-formal-verification.html 

[24]  K. Claessen and J. Hughes, “QuickCheck: A Lightweight Tool for Random Testing of Haskell 

Programs,” in  Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional 

Programming (ICFP) , ACM, 2000, pp. 268–279. doi:  10.1145/351240.351266 .[25]  National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Security and Privacy Controls for Information 

Systems and Organizations,” technical report NIST Special Publication 800-53 Revision 5, 2020. 

doi:  10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r5 .Appendix A: GraphFlow Language Example 

The following is a GFL example demonstrating formal verification with mathematical properties: 

# GraphFlow Language (GFL) Example - Minimal Non-Trivial Verified Workflow 

# Demonstrates verification, composition, and assumptions 

diagram [blueprint] :calculate-sum-of-squares-bounded "Calculate Sum of Squares (Bounded)" :

description : |

Calculates the sum of squares for two values: a² + b². 

Demonstrates formal verification with contracts, branching, 

and an explicit assumption boundary. 

swimlanes :

- "System ":

width : 2

inputs : {

.a: :number 

.b : :number 

}

outputs : {

.sum : :number 

}

# Preconditions 

requires :

- (:ne $.a null) 

- (:ne $.b null) 

# Postconditions 

ensures :

- (:gte $.return.sum 0) 

properties :

- (:is-deterministic $.return.sum) 

- (:is-total) 

- (:is-commutative $.a $.b) 

variables :

$.aSquared : 0

$.bSquared : 0

model :

1. [task] "Square a" @system --> 3:

action :

calls : (:multiply {

.a : $.a 

.b : $.a 

})

assigns : $.aSquared 

ensures : (:gte $.aSquared 0) 

2. [task] "Square b" @system --> 3:

action :

calls : (:multiply {

.a : $.b 

.b : $.b 

})

assigns : $.bSquared 

ensures : (:gte $.bSquared 0) 

3. [milestone] "Sum Squares" @system --> 4:

requires : (:and (:ne $.aSquared null) (:ne $.bSquared null)) 

action :

calls : (:add {

.a : $.aSquared 

.b : $.bSquared 

})

assigns : $.sum 

ensures : (:gte $.sum 0) 

4. [decision] "Is sum within bound?" @system :yes--> 5a :no--> 5b :

action :

calls : (:condition {

.yes : (:lte $.sum 1000) 

})5a. [milestone] "Return Result" @system :

action :

calls : (:return {

.sum : $.sum 

})

ensures : (:lte $.return.sum 1000) 

5b. [milestone] "Reject Unbounded Sum" @system :

action :

calls : (:throw "Sum exceeds allowed bound") 

# Explicit assumption boundary: 

properties :

- (:assumed-boundary) Appendix B: Cognitive Testing Care Pathway 

This appendix presents the Cognitive Testing Care Pathway as a GFL reconstruction of the workflow deployed in the 2025 pilot (see “Empirical Evaluation”). 

# GraphFlow Language (GFL) - Cognitive Testing Care Pathway 

#

# GFL reconstruction of the 2025 pilot workflow, demonstrating GraphFlow's three pillars: 

# cohort search, workflow automation, and operational dashboards. 

# Pillar I - Cohort Search 

trigger "Cognitive Testing for Eligible Patients" :

trigger-type : :diagram 

description : "Enroll the eligible patients into the Cognitive Testing Care Pathway "

active : true 

auto-start : true 

schedule :

interval : :daily 

source :

query : :cognitive-screening-eligible 

repeat :

interval : :yearly 

calls : :cognitive-testing-care-pathway 

assignment :

- (:assign-swimlane-contact {

.swimlane : :patient 

.contactId : $.id 

})

- (:assign-swimlane-contact-by-ext-id {

.swimlane : :provider 

.extId : $.extData.usualProviderId 

})

query "Cognitive Screening Eligible" :

description : "Look for patients with upcoming appointments eligible for a cognitive screening "

resource-type : :contact 

ext-type : "Patient "

filters :

- with : :upcoming-appointment 

- with : :over-60 

- without : :cognitive-screening-completed 

# Pillar II - Formal Automation 

diagram "Cognitive Testing Care Pathway" :

description : "Test patients for cognitive impairment "

swimlanes :

- "Patient "

- "Staff "

- "Provider "

- "MedFlow "

- "EHR "

model :

1. [task] "Order Cognitive Screening" @medflow --> 2:

assigned : [:staff , :ehr ]

action :

calls : (:create-lab-order {

.orderType : "OTHER "

.labOrder : "Cognitive Screening "

.patientId : $.swimlanes.patient.contact.ext-id 

.orderingProviderId : $.swimlanes.provider.contact.ext-id 

})

assigns : $.order 

ensures : (:ne $.order null) 

2. [task] "Complete Cognitive Screening" @patient --> 3:

description : "Patient is able to complete this at home before their appointment "

action :

calls : (:send-text {

.template : "cognitive-screening "

.orderId : $.order.id 

.contact : $.swimlanes.patient.contact 

})

3. [wait] "Cognitive Screening Result" @medflow --> 4:

assigned : [:ehr ]

action :

calls : (:await-with-tag {

.resource : $.swimlanes.patient.contact 

.filters :

- with : :cognitive-screening-completed 

})

4. [decision] "Further testing recommended?" @provider :yes --> 5:

action :calls : (:condition {

.yes : (:with-tag $.swimlanes.patient.contact :cognitive-screening-positive) 

})

5. [task] "Order Cognitive Assessment" @medflow --> 6:

assigned : [:staff , :ehr ]

action :

calls : (:create-lab-order {

.orderType : "OTHER "

.labOrder : "Cognitive Assessment "

.patientId : $.swimlanes.patient.contact.ext-id 

.orderingProviderId : $.swimlanes.provider.contact.ext-id 

})

6. [meeting] "Proctor Cognitive Assessment" @staff --> 7:

assigned : [:patient ]

action :

calls : :next 

7. [wait] "Cognitive Assessment Result" @medflow --> 8:

assigned : [:staff , :ehr ]

action :

calls : (:await-with-tag {

.resource : $.swimlanes.patient.contact 

.filters :

- with : :cognitive-assessment-completed 

})

8. [decision] "Care Plan recommended?" @provider :yes --> 9:

action :

calls : (:condition {

.yes : (:with-tag $.swimlanes.patient.contact :cognitive-assessment-positive) 

})

9. [task] "Order Cognitive Care Plan" @medflow :

action :

calls : (:create-lab-order {

.orderType : "OTHER "

.labOrder : "Cognitive Care Plan "

.patientId : $.swimlanes.patient.contact.ext-id 

.orderingProviderId : $.swimlanes.provider.contact.ext-id 

})

# Pillar III - Operational Dashboards 

query "Cognitive Screening Ordered" :

resource-type : :contact 

ext-type : "Patient "

filters :

- with : :cognitive-screening-ordered 

query "Cognitive Screening Completed" :

resource-type : :contact 

ext-type : "Patient "

filters :

- with : :cognitive-screening-completed 

metric "Cognitive Screening Ordered" :

description : "Daily count of how many screenings have been ordered "

query : :cognitive-screening-ordered 

aggregation : :count 

schedule :

interval : :daily 

metric "Cognitive Screening Completed" :

description : "Daily count of how many screenings are completed "

query : :cognitive-screening-completed 

aggregation : :count 

schedule :

interval : :daily Appendix C: Visual Workflow Example 

This appendix provides a visual representation of the Cognitive Testing Care Pathway deployed in the 2025 pilot (see “Empirical Evaluation”). 

Figure 1: Cognitive Testing Care Pathway with swimlanes for Patient, Staff, Provider, MedFlow, and EHR. Appendix D: Formal Semantics and Theorem Statements 

This appendix defines the formal semantics needed to state and interpret GraphFlow’s correctness guarantees. All claims in this paper are relative to these 

semantics and the explicit assumptions stated herein. 

GraphFlow uses two distinct but related semantics: 

• Compile-time (code generation) : a restricted class of diagrams that are admissible to the compiler and subject to static verification. 

• Runtime (durable execution) : an event-log-based execution model that supports retries, replay, and long-running workflows. 

D.1 Formal State 

Workflow execution state is modeled as a finite mapping from variables to values: 

• 𝜎  : Var  → Val  represents the workflow state, including inputs, intermediate variables, and outputs. 

• Milestone or return primitives write the final result to  𝜎 return .

For durable execution, runtime state additionally includes an event log: 

• 𝜎 𝑅  = (𝜎 , ℓ) where  ℓ is an append-only sequence of events  𝑒 .

D.2 Core Artifacts 

Let the following sets be defined: 

• 𝕍 : node catalog (standalone nodes). 

• 𝐷  ∈ 𝔻 : diagrams. 

• 𝐼  ∈ 𝕀 : integrations. 

• 𝐴  ∈ 𝔸 : workflow automations. 

• 𝕏  = 𝔻  ∪ 𝕀  ∪ 𝔸 : executable artifacts in the GraphFlow runtime. 

• 𝑃  ∈ ℙ: contacts (persons). 

D.3 Diagram Structure 

A diagram is defined as a directed graph with associated metadata: 

• Graph : 𝐺  = (𝑉  , 𝐸 ) where: 

‣ 𝑉  ⊆ 𝕍  is a finite set of diagram nodes. 

‣ 𝑛  ∈ 𝑉  denotes a node in a diagram. 

‣ 𝑛  ∈ 𝕍  denotes a catalog (standalone) node. 

‣ 𝐸  ⊆ 𝑉  × Σ𝐸  × 𝑉  is a labeled edge relation. 

‣ Σ𝐸  = {to , yes , no , maybe }

• Diagram : 𝐷  = (𝐺 , 𝜇 ) where  𝜇  is a tuple of assignment functions: 

‣ 𝜆  : 𝑉  → 𝐿  assigns each node to a swimlane (lane) owner. 

– 𝐿 𝑐  ⊆ 𝐿  designates verifier-eligible (core) lanes. 

– 𝜆 assigned  : 𝑉  ⇀ 2𝐿  optionally assigns additional swimlanes to a node. 

‣ 𝜏  : 𝑉  → Σ𝑉  assigns a node type. 

– Σ𝑉  = {task , meeting , report , object , decision , queue , wait , milestone , diagram }

‣ 𝜋  : 𝑉  → (ℝ × ℝ) assigns layout coordinates. 

‣ 𝛼  : 𝑉  ⇀ 𝔸  optionally associates nodes with automation actions. 

‣ 𝑤  : 𝑉  ⇀ (ℝ × ℝ) optionally assigns cost/time weights. 

‣ 𝛿  : 𝑉  ⇀ 𝔻  optionally assigns a subdiagram. 

‣ 𝜓  : 𝐿  ⇀ ℙ optionally assigns a contact to a swimlane. 

Let  𝔻  be the set of all well-formed diagrams. Let  𝔻 𝑐  ⊆ 𝔻  be the subset of diagrams admissible to the compiler (acyclic and free of forked parallelism). 

D.4 Compile-time Semantics (big-step) 

Compilation maps admissible diagrams to executable artifacts: 𝒞︀ 

: 𝔻 𝑐  → 𝔸  ∪ 𝕀 

Let  𝑋  =𝒞︀  (𝐷 ) for  𝐷  ∈ 𝔻 𝑐 .

Diagram execution at compile-time is defined by a big-step evaluation relation: 

⟨𝐷 , 𝜎 ⟩ ⇒ 𝜎 ′

meaning that executing diagram  𝐷  from initial state  𝜎  yields final state  𝜎 ′.

Compiled artifacts execute according to their source diagram: 

⟨𝑋 , 𝜎 ⟩ ⇒ 𝜎 ′ ⟺ ⟨𝐷 , 𝜎 ⟩ ⇒ 𝜎 ′

Composition obligations are generated along edges  (𝑢 , 𝑠 , 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝐸  where  𝑠  ∈ Σ𝐸  : for any edge from node  𝑢  to node  𝑣 , the postcondition of  𝑢  must imply 

the precondition of  𝑣 . Formally, for all edges  (𝑢 , 𝑠 , 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝐸  and all states  𝜎 ′:

∀𝜎 ′ : Ensures 𝑢 (𝜎 ′) ⇒ Requires 𝑣 (𝜎 ′)

This ensures that sequential composition preserves correctness assumptions across node boundaries. 

D.5 Runtime Semantics (small-step) 

Runtime execution is modeled as a small-step transition relation that emits events: 

⟨𝑛 , (𝜎 , ℓ)⟩ → (𝜎 ′, ℓ + 𝑒 )

Nodes assigned to verifier-ineligible lanes represent effect boundaries. Formally: • If  𝜆 (𝑛 ) ∉ 𝐿 𝑐 , then execution of  𝑛  obtains its outcome from an external source (external system, AI, or human judgment). 

• The observed outcome MUST be recorded as an event  𝑒  appended to the event log  ℓ.

• Replay consults  ℓ rather than re-evaluating boundary effects. 

This requirement ensures deterministic replay for a fixed initial state and event log. 

D.6 Contracts 

Correctness is expressed relative to explicit contracts. 

Each node or diagram may declare predicates: 

• Requires 𝑛 (𝜎 ) — precondition. 

• Ensures 𝑛 (𝜎 ′) — postcondition. 

Predicates are deterministic expressions over workflow state and are interpreted only for nodes whose semantics are defined in the compile-time model. 

Boundary nodes are not proven correct. Their outcomes are treated as recorded assumptions. 

D.7 Theorems 

The following theorems provide the formal basis for GraphFlow’s correctness claims. 

Theorem 1 (Contract soundness for compiled artifacts: partial correctness).  Assume: 

• A compiled artifact  𝑋  is produced from a diagram  𝐷  with  𝑋  =𝒞︀  (𝐷 ).

• All referenced actions are deterministic and satisfy their declared contracts. 

• All generated proof obligations for  𝑋  are accepted by the verifier. 

Then, for all workflow states  𝜎 :

If  Requires 𝑋 (𝜎 ) holds and  ⟨𝑋 , 𝜎 ⟩ ⇒ 𝜎 ′, then  Ensures 𝑋 (𝜎 ′) holds. 

This establishes partial correctness. Termination requires separate assumptions or proofs. 

Theorem 2 (Deterministic replay: runtime).  Assume: 

• All nondeterministic outcomes influencing control flow are recorded in the event log  ℓ.

• Replay reads outcomes from  ℓ instead of consulting external sources. 

Then replay is deterministic for a fixed initial state  𝜎 0 and event log  ℓ.