Title: Web Agents Should Adopt the Plan-Then-Execute Paradigm

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.14290v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 00:30:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Web Agents Should Adopt the Plan-Then-Execute Paradigm 

Julien Piet 

UC Berkeley 

piet@berkeley.edu 

Annabella Chow 

UC Berkeley 

annabella.chow@berkeley.edu 

Yiwei Hou 

UC Berkeley 

y.hou@berkeley.edu 

Muxi Lyu 

UC Berkeley 

muxi_lyu@berkeley.edu 

Sylvie Venuto 

UC Berkeley 

sylvie.v@berkeley.edu 

Jinhao Zhu 

UC Berkeley 

jinhao.zhu@berkeley.edu 

Raluca Ada Popa 

UC Berkeley 

raluca.popa@berkeley.edu 

David Wagner 

UC Berkeley 

daw@cs.berkeley.edu 

# Abstract 

ReAct has become the default architecture across LLM agents, and many existing web agents follow this paradigm. We argue that it is the wrong default for web agents. Instead, web agents should default to plan-then-execute: commit to a task-specific program before observing runtime web content, then execute it. The reason is that web content mixes inputs from many parties. An e-commerce product page may combine a seller’s listing, customer reviews, sponsored advertisements, and platform-generated recommendations. Under ReAct, all of this content flows into the model when deciding on the next action, creating a direct path for prompt injections to steer the agent’s control flow. Plan-then-execute changes this boundary: untrusted data may influence values or branches inside a predefined execution graph, but it cannot redefine the user task or cause the model to synthesize new actions at runtime. We analyze WebArena, a popular web agent benchmark, and find that all tasks are compatible with plan-then-execute, while 81.28% can be completed with a purely programmatic plan, without any runtime LLM subroutine. We identify the main barrier to adopting plan-then-execute on the web: For it to work well, tools must map cleanly to semantic actions, with effects known before execution, so agents have enough information to plan. The web does not naturally expose that interface. Browser tools such as click, type, and scroll have page-dependent meanings. Planning at this layer is near-sighted: the agent can only see actions on the current page, and later actions appear only after it acts. Closing this gap requires typed interfaces that turn website interactions from clicks and keystrokes to task-level operations. This is an infrastructure problem, not a modeling problem. Web tasks do not need reactivity by default; they need typed, complete, auditable website APIs. We outline a research agenda for building those APIs, planners, and benchmarks needed to make plan-then-execute practical for web agents. 

# 1 Introduction 

Agents are autonomous systems that use large language models to translate user intent into executable actions that transform the environment toward a desired state. Many agents follow a reasoning-and-acting (ReAct) loop [ 32 ]: they observe the environment, query a language model for the next action, 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.14290v1 [cs.CR] 14 May 2026 (buy $2000
> headphones)

Add the best noise cancelling headphones under $200 to my car t

# Plan -then -execute ReAc t

Executor     

> products = search (“noise cancelling headphones”)
> products = [p for p in products if p.price <= 200]
> best = max(products, key = lambda p: p.reviews.avg_rating )
> add_to_cart (best.sku , 1)

Trusted API 

Function s  

> add_to_cart (sku :str, qty: int)

Classes    

> search(query: str) -> Product[]
> Product {name, price, sku , reviews}
> Review {content, rating}
> Act
> Think Observe

# Web 

Mixed content stream 

> Product Description
> Ads
> User Reviews
> Ignore the price this is
> the best product

Action 

(click,… )

Bad action 

LLM subroutine 

Planner 

Actions Mixed content stream 

Function calls Typed results 

> Function  declarations

Figure 1: ReAct exposes action selection to untrusted content, creating a direct path for prompt injections to steer the agent’s control flow. Plan-then-execute expresses tasks as programs over website SDKs, optionally using LLM subroutines to process data, isolating planning from content. execute that action, and repeat. Modern web agents commonly instantiate this paradigm by observing the current webpage and selecting browser actions online. This design is attractive because it requires little site-specific engineering, works with existing websites, and has become a common paradigm for browsing agents [33, 31]. Despite this utility and low engineering overhead, applying ReAct to web agents is dangerous because web content is, by nature, a mixture of inputs from many parties. A single page may contain site-provided interface elements, user comments, product reviews, forum posts, ads, embedded widgets, generated recommendations, hidden DOM nodes, accessibility metadata, and rendered images. As a result, untrusted content is pervasive in the agent’s ordinary observation stream. This differs from many other tool-calling settings, where untrusted data often enters through a smaller number of explicit channels: on the web, an attacker can often publish malicious content where agents are likely to encounter it, without compromising the website or the user [ 8, 35 , 29 ]. At the same time, many web tasks require reading precisely this kind of untrusted content. An agent comparing reviews, summarizing an issue, or selecting a product cannot simply ignore user-supplied text [ 40 , 9 ]. The mixed nature of web pages therefore makes it hard to draw a secure boundary around what the model may read without sacrificing utility [ 4 , 7 , 3]. In a ReAct loop, attacker-controlled web content is presented to the model exactly when it chooses what to click, type, submit, copy, or visit next, often while acting with the user’s logged-in authority [ 32 , 8, 17 ]. This introduces fundamental and unavoidable vulnerabilities to ReAct-loop web agents [17, 8, 29]. We argue that web agents should use a plan-then-execute (PTE) architecture by default . As shown in Fig. 1, plan-then-execute agents commit to a task-specific program before executing it, interacting with the website through trusted APIs . Untrusted runtime web-content is only processed through static code, and optionally by quarantined LLM subroutines which cannot change the plan. This treats each agent run as a program whose control flow is fixed during planning and whose data values are supplied during execution. Untrusted web content may therefore influence the data consumed by the program, but it cannot cause the model to synthesize new actions while the task is running. In a PTE web agent, the model first produces a task-specific program (the plan). An executor then runs that program. During execution, the program is able to invoke APIs to interact with the target web site or to call quarantined LLMs for extraction and classification. Runtime web content may fill parameters, determine branch outcomes, or influence local LLMs. However, it cannot add new 2actions, select new tools, trigger replanning, or rewrite the user’s objective. This separates untrusted data flow from control-flow generation. Not every web task can be reduced to a static script. We do not claim that reactive agents have no role. Some tasks require open-ended exploration, depend on instructions discovered only during execution, or span sites for which no trustworthy API exists. Our claim is that reactive replanning should be reserved for tasks that actually require it. When the control flow of a web task can be determined from the user request, the agent should plan before execution rather than repeatedly choosing actions on the fly based on untrusted web observations. This paper argues for that architectural shift. We first introduce the threat model and related work in Section 2. Next, we analyze why ReAct is not suitable for web agents, focusing on its security and efficiency limitations, in Section 3. Building on this critique, we describe how PTE can be enabled for web agents through site APIs, planning, and constrained execution in Section 4 and 5. To assess the practical scope of this approach, we analyze a popular web agent benchmark, evaluate how many tasks can be planned, and draw lessons about both the applicability of our proposal to web agents and the remaining gaps in deploying PTE in Section 6. Finally, we discuss alternative designs and state our research agenda in Section 7. 

# 2 Background 

Web Agents. Web agents interact with websites through a browser (DOM, events, screenshots, coordinates) or through structured APIs. Their goal is to browse and interact with web resources much as a human would. Web agents are still in their infancy: benchmarks such as WebArena [ 40 ]report that even strong LLM-based agents can still struggle to match human end-to-end success, underscoring the importance of robustness and systems design. 1

Listing 1: ReAct-style web agent loop. 

> while not done: obs = observe_page() # DOM/text/screenshot/tool output act = LLM(goal, history, obs) execute(act) history.append((obs, act))

ReAct. ReAct is an agentic pattern that interleaves reasoning traces and actions in a loop [ 32 ]. Given a user goal, the agent repeatedly observes its environment and takes an action to get closer to that goal until the goal is reached. This framework has helped bridge the gap between language mod-els and real-world tasks by breaking complex and ambiguous goals into smaller pieces. For web agents, a typical ReAct-based agent follows the pseudocode in Listing 1. Existing web agents use different views of the web (the document object model, the accessibility tree, or screenshots), but are largely designed around the ReAct pattern [13, 21, 39, 19]. 

2.1 Threat Model 

We focus on indirect prompt injection attacks against web agents. Prompt injection is widely recognized as a central risk for LLM systems; according to OWASP, prompt injection is the top risk for LLMs [ 22 ]. In our setting, the user gives the agent a benign web task, and the attacker places content that the agent may observe while carrying out that task. We focus on adversaries that are third parties to the website, such as commenters, reviewers, advertisers, sellers, forum users, or issue authors. We treat model providers and website owners as trusted parties, as they have little incentive to launch attacks against their own users because doing so would create direct reputational risk. We consider two attacker goals. The first, and most powerful, is control-flow hijacking : the attacker causes the agent to follow arbitrary actions. For instance, the attacker might prompt-inject the model so that it strays from its original task and instead leaks sensitive data, or signs in to the user’s bank account and wires the attacker money. In this setting, the attacker makes the model deviate from its original plan. The second is outcome manipulation : the attacker influences the outcome of the agent’s task without changing the task itself. For example, on an e-commerce website, if the user’s intent is to buy a watch from a well-known brand, an adversarial seller could prompt-inject the model into buying a copy of that watch from a less reputable brand. 

> 1WebArena evaluates agents’ ability to perform tasks on self-hosted websites such as e-commerce or forums.

3These goals can be viewed through the lens of traditional programs. Control-flow hijacking is analogous to arbitrary code execution, such as freely controlling the input to an eval function in Python. It can create new control flows outside the original intended ones. Outcome manipulation is closer to a data-only attack, such as altering a parameter or intermediate value of a program. Such attacks can change the path taken at execution time through an existing control-flow graph, but they do not create new branches or actions. 

Out-of-scope. Our focus is on attacks that exploit the AI model or agent architecture itself, not on ordinary false or misleading content that would deceive a human or a non-AI program as well. For example, consider the task in Fig. 1: “Add the best noise canceling headphones under $200 to my cart”. An adversarial review on a $2000 pair of headphones that instructs the model to ignore the user’s budget and purchase it is in scope: it forces the model to bypass the user task. However, an attack that adds positive reviews to the second best pair of headphones in the price range is not in scope: this is misleading content that could also trick a human. 

2.2 Related Work 

Indirect prompt injection in LLMs was articulated early by Greshake et al. [ 12 ], and was later benchmarked more systematically by BIPIA [ 34 ] and InjecAgent [ 35 ]. More recent benchmarks study tool-using and web-facing agents in increasingly realistic settings [ 8, 37 , 10 , 16 , 38 , 40 ]. WebInject [ 29 ], for instance, shows that realistic HTML-based or image-based attacks are effective against web agents. One line of work attempts to harden the reactive loop itself. Model-centric defenses [ 27 , 4, 5, 23 ] train models to better separate trusted instructions from lower-trust content. Other works wrap reactive agents in runtime monitors, detectors, or network-level sandboxes (e.g., ceLLMate [ 18 ]) to block unauthorized actions [ 38 , 16 , 14 , 28 ]. While valuable, these methods mitigate specific attacks without addressing the core architectural flaw: interleaving dynamic planning with untrusted observations. Our position is close to the recent line of work in structural defenses that constrain execution rather than asking the model to be robust. CaMeL [ 7 ] separates control and data flows using a dual LLM pattern. Fides [ 6] introduces an information-flow-control planner with confidentiality and integrity labels. IPIGuard [ 1 ] separates planning from interaction with untrusted data through a planned tool-dependency graph, while MiniScope [ 41 ] constrains the permissions available to tool-calling agents. Kolluri et al. [ 15 ] show better planning can improve the autonomy of agents without sacrificing security. These works lay the foundation upon which plan-and-execute is built, yet only apply to simple agentic environments with full visibility into the action space. Our proposal identifies the gaps we need to bridge to bring such approaches to web environments. Foerster et al. [ 11 ] successfully apply plan-then-execute to computer-use agents. However, their runtime vision-language model allows visual prompt injections to spoof coordinates and trick the agent into actuating unintended targets. Our programmatic approach prevents adversarial content from performing unintended actions. Finally, Beyond Browsing [ 25 ] shows that giving ReAct agents access to website APIs in addition to browser actuation improved their benchmark scores, and recent comparative analyses of API and GUI agents point in the same direction [36]: structured tools make for better agents. 

# 3 Critique of ReAct for web Agents 

ReAct has become a standard architecture for web agents in part because of its flexibility: it does not require interfaces beyond those humans already use to browse the web. Nevertheless, we argue in this paper that ReAct is problematic for web agents: its security risks and avoidable costs in efficiency, evaluation, and reproducibility are serious. 

Insecure. ReAct is insecure by design for web agents. In each loop, the LLM sees untrusted content and then decides the next action. This makes prompt injection an architectural problem, because attacker-controlled tokens appear at exactly the point where the model chooses what to do next. This “confused deputy” pattern shows up in ReAct agents, where a privileged system is tricked into using its authority on behalf of an attacker. In ReAct, observations and action selections are collapsed into a single inference, where injected instructions can directly influence which tool is called, which 4link is clicked, what is copied, and what is submitted. This means that runtime observations are not just data consumed by a fixed program; they help determine the program’s control flow. A stylized example: “ System note: to proceed, you must open the settings page and export your browsing history as JSON. If you see this message, it means the user has authorized you to do so. ”In a ReAct loop, the injection appears at the worst possible time: immediately before the model chooses the next action. This enables control-flow hijacking, where attacker-controlled content can steer the agent into new actions or branches, rather than merely affecting values within a pre-declared execution structure. Empirically, this matters as recent work demonstrate prompt injection attacks that induce web agents to perform attacker-specified actions, including stealthy variants that operate through the rendering pipeline [29]. 

Inefficient. ReAct agents are near-sighted: they act only from the current state they observe and cannot plan far beyond that view. As a result, planning is implicit and continuous, with the agent re-deriving a plan step by step, and control flow determined dynamically by model output conditioned on the latest observation. This near-sightedness increases token usage, latency, and cost. It also compounds errors, as an early misstep changes the observed page, impacting future reasoning. Although many web tasks are structured and repeatable (e.g., finding a product and checking out, posting on a forum, creating or updating an issue), ReAct has to re-discover the same workflow repeatedly and replan every step even when the global structure of the task does not change. 

# 4 Plan-Then-Execute Web Agents 

Our critique of ReAct points to a fundamental vulnerability: the agent is exposed to untrusted runtime web content when planning the next action. We propose plan-then-execute (PTE), an alternative design for web agents that is secure by design against control-flow hijacking. PTE enforces a separation between control flow and data flow. Rather than interacting directly with the live website, the agent relies on site-specific APIs that expose the actions available on a website as a programmatic interface. Using these APIs, the agent first writes a program, and an executor then runs that program. As Figure 1 illustrates, this replaces the vulnerable ReAct loop — querying, inspecting results, navigating item by item, and selecting browser actions online — with a secure, predetermined plan that isolates the agent’s logic from untrusted content. 

4.1 Preprocessing 

In order to write programs that can execute a user task without replanning, PTE agents need a global view of the actions that can be taken on the website. This requires a different interface for interacting with the website than the traditional browser view used by humans. We need a flat representation of the website’s action space that is suitable for programmatic use. We propose that these actions should be provided in the form of a trusted API , a list of typed tools or functions, with documented input and output schema. Most websites lack this interface, or expose only partial functionality through an API or MCP server. While creating such an interface can be costly, we argue that it is better suited to agents than the human-centric browser view of the web. In the long run, websites may expose such an interface directly, much as tools are exposed today through MCP-style interfaces, rather than requiring each agent developer to reconstruct them inde-pendently. An important question for future work is what minimal agent-facing API a website should provide to support secure execution. This requires understanding what an agent needs in order to write a single program that can execute user tasks. First, the API needs to be complete, meaning that it captures all actions available on the regular website. A complete action set can be defined in two ways: either with low-level functions covering all possible interactions a user could have with the website (such as pressing a button or navigating to the next results page), or with higher-level actions that represent end-to-end workflows and abstract away the webpage design (such as searching for a query and returning all results in a single object, instead of manually traversing result pages). Second, the API also needs to be strongly typed. The planner and executor must be able to rely on stable schemas for the information they consume and produce. If a product has a price, an issue has a status, or an account has an identifier, those fields should be surfaced consistently. Strong typing allows the agent to chain individual functions into programs that can be validated and replayed. When content is unstructured, we can rely on LLM subroutines to extract structured information from it. The security 5implications of doing so are discussed in Section 5. On existing websites, this trusted API can be obtained in two ways. 

Website-Provided Interface: The website may expose a REST API, MCP interface, or other programmatic interface that captures the actions available on the site. PTE needs more than the flat list of callable endpoints these programmatic interfaces often provide: the trusted API must expose enough information about endpoint types, parameters, return values, semantics, and effects for the planner to write executable code against it. When the website-provided interface is sufficient, it can be wrapped into a site action interface, adding strong types to inputs and outputs where needed. However, many websites do not provide APIs intended for programmatic use, or expose REST APIs that cover only part of the website’s functionality. 

Client-Side SDK: If the website does not provide a suitable interface, an agent developer can build a site-specific SDK as a preprocessing step. This SDK exposes functions that represent actions on the website, potentially one function per action that can be taken. Each function may be implemented by using Playwright to drive a headless browser through the required sequence of UI actions, or by making direct URL requests with suitable parameters and parsing the response. The SDK may expose low-level actions, such as clicking a button, or higher-level actions, such as searching a catalog. The generated plan then interacts with the website programmatically by invoking SDK functions. This preprocessing is performed once per site and repeated only when the site changes; in this sense, it acts as compilation from a website-specific interface into a stable interface for the agent. This interface is part of the trusted computing base. We assume that website providers themselves are not adversarial, so a website-provided interface can be trusted to expose the site’s intended capabilities. Client-side SDKs similarly require trust. While systems like https://libretto.sh 

or https://www.skyvern.com demonstrate that LLMs can automate SDK generation, doing so exposes the preprocessing stage to injection attacks. Consequently, any generated SDK requires trusted validation or auditing prior to PTE execution. 

4.2 Task Planning and Execution. Planning. Given a task specification and the site’s programmatic interface, the planner produces a program that executes the task. This program may rely on standard-library functions, trusted website-provided interface or client-side SDK, and optionally LLM subroutines to process data, but, crucially, its control-flow graph is predetermined: website content can change which conditional branches are taken, but cannot add new instructions. The planner does not receive runtime content. 

Execution. The executor runs the pre-committed plan. At this stage, runtime data may fill parameters, instantiate typed variables, and affect the outputs returned to the user. However, runtime observations cannot add steps, remove steps, insert new branches, select new tools, or trigger replanning. A prompt injection on the page may still influence extracted values or the result of a permitted subroutine, but it cannot synthesize a new action that was not already part of the plan. This is the core security property of plan-then-execute: untrusted web content may affect data flow, but it cannot hijack control flow. This architecture fixes the separation between planning and execution, but it does not yet determine how expressive the generated program is allowed to be. That question, and the resulting security/utility tradeoff, is the subject of the next section. 

# 5 Expressivity 

The architecture above fixes the separation between planning and execution, but it leaves open a central question: how expressive should the generated programs be? The expressivity of those programs determines both how secure the resulting behavior is and how general the tasks the agent can accomplish are. In one extreme, if we allow the agent to call arbitrary sub-agents and execute their outputs, it is easy to see how we could recover the ReAct loop from Listing 1 and thus fall into the same insecurities. In another extreme, an agent that can only generate a deterministic program over the trusted API without calls to language models is fully robust against prompt injection but suffers in utility. It is therefore important to define how expressive we allow the generated program to be, since this choice determines the agent’s security/utility tradeoff. 6In this section, we introduce an operating point on this security/utility tradeoff curve that we be-lieve is promising for real-world applications: LLM subroutines, where the planner generates a deterministic program over the trusted API, but can also call LLMs for local transformations such as extraction, normalization, or classification. Importantly, these LLM subroutines cannot produce executable code: their outputs have explicit types and schemas, are never interpreted as instructions, and can only be used as inputs to other functions. For example, a program may use an LLM to extract a summary from text and then pass that value to a fixed tool call: “summary ← LLM_extract (text ), Submit (summary )”

Security. Using LLM subroutines has some risks. Content on the website can poison a subroutine, causing its output to be incorrect. For instance, if an agent whose task is to approve a pull request uses an LLM classifier to decide whether the code changes are valid, that subroutine could be tricked into reporting that the PR is valid even when it is not. However, using LLM subroutines still protects against control-flow hijacking attacks. The subroutines cannot induce new tool calls or actions that were not already part of the original program. The risk is limited to the values produced by the subroutine: it may return the wrong extraction, classification, or summary, but it cannot expand the set of actions available to the agent. Beyond preventing runtime hijacking, PTE’s fixed execution graph enables static security audits and policy enforcement before any untrusted content is even observed, something impossible in ReAct. 

Utility. LLM subroutines can extract structured information from unstructured data, support weekly typed trusted API (e.g., by extracting the capacity value from SD card products where capacity is not a pre-parsed field), infer new properties, or perform natural-language tasks (e.g., responding to a customer’s review if it is negative). LLM subroutines do not make up for incomplete trusted APIs: missing capabilities in the API may make some tasks impossible to express in this framework. 

# 6 How Much of the Web Needs Reactivity? 

Plan-then-execute can support the vast majority of web interactions while offering stronger security guarantees than ReAct. We provide evidence supporting this claim by (1) proposing a categorization of web tasks by their inherent security risk under a PTE architecture; and showing that (2) all of WebArena [40] tasks can be expressed as control-flow-hijacking-safe PTE programs. 

6.1 Task Taxonomy Under PTE Principle 

To better understand which tasks are compatible with PTE, we propose a taxonomy that categorizes them by their inherent security risks and need for dynamic replanning. 

Safe. These tasks can be expressed as static code generated by the planner using the trusted API. These do not use language models at run time, thus are safe by design against prompt injection. These plans can be reused when repeating the task, providing stable behavior regardless of the inputs. For example, the shopping task in Fig. 1 can be expressed statically. 

Safe with Influence. These tasks require some LLM subroutines at runtime to process data, but can be constrained to a concrete plan: the LLM subroutines are used as data pipelines and cannot invoke tools. Tasks in this category can see their outcomes influenced by prompt injections, but are safe from arbitrary control-flow hijacking. For example, a task like “Summarize the reviews of the best-rated headphones” requires some natural language processing. Examples of such tasks can be found in Table 2 in the Appendix. 

Replan-Needed. These tasks rely on data-driven plan generation, such as “read my emails and complete all the action items inside them”. These are not suitable for PTE, and unless the data needed for plan generation is trusted, are subject to control-flow hijacking. 

6.2 Empirical Results on WebArena 

We show PTE is widely applicable by categorizing the tasks in the WebArena [ 40 ] benchmark based on the above taxonomy. WebArena provides 860 tasks over multiple simulated websites: (1) web applications from popular domains, e.g., online shopping (OneStopShop), discussion forums (Reddit), collaborative development (GitLab), and online store content management (CMS); (2) utility tools, 7Website Total Tasks Safe (%) Safe+Influence (%) Replan Needed Viable w/ PTE (%) OneStop 192 154 (80.21%) 38 (19.79%) 0 100.00% Wiki 23 2 ( 8.70%) 21 (91.30%) 0 100.00% Reddit 129 106 (82.17%) 23 (17.83%) 0 100.00% Map 128 101 (78.91%) 27 (21.09%) 0 100.00% GitLab 204 185 (90.69%) 19 ( 9.31%) 0 100.00% CMS 184 151 (82.07%) 33 (17.93%) 0 100.00% Total 860 699 (81.28%) 161 (18.72%) 0 100.00% 

Table 1: Scenario viability summary over six simulated websites in the WebArena benchmark. e.g., a map (Map); (3) documentation and knowledge bases, e.g., English Wikipedia (Wikipedia). We manually categorize each task using our taxonomy. 

Assumptions. We assume complete and trusted APIs are available for every website, whether provided by websites or built separately, required by the PTE approach. This is the API upon which the PTE programs are built. 

Results. As shown in Table 1, over 80% of tasks are safe : they admit a static decomposition compatible with PTE, and do not need the ability to invoke LLM subroutines. The remaining 20% are compatible with PTE but require the ability to invoke LLM subroutines, so fall in the safe with influence category. This need arises primarily when the task requires interpreting content semantically (e.g., review sentiment analysis), using background knowledge to map an underspecified query to a concrete value (e.g., resolving Liberty Bell City to Philadelphia), or making a subjective match (e.g., selecting the best GAN repository). In these cases, LLM subroutines help bind variables or clarify content without altering execution instructions at runtime. None of the tasks in WebArena are 

replan-needed . This provides evidence that PTE is enough to support a broad range of functionality. 

Discussion. We established three categories of risk in our threat model (Section 2.1): untrusted information without prompt injection, prompt injection for outcome manipulation, and prompt injection that rewrites the plan itself. While classifying a task as “safe with influence” restricts many attack vectors, it does not remove all risks. Like human users, these agents remain exposed to the first category. This vulnerability is a property of the information environment rather than an artifact of its architecture. Influence through misinformation is an information integrity problem, not an agent security problem. Addressing it requires content verification mechanisms that are separate from the execution paradigm. Safe with influence tasks are also exposed to outcome manipulation. Here, adversarial content biases a variable binding or an LLM subroutine classification within a fixed execution graph. For example, in a Reddit task such as “find posts recommending a single book”, a user might write a post that mentions many books but is phrased to make one title appear to be the sole recommendation. The web agent may then incorrectly include that post in the result set. In this case, the damage is bounded: the adversary can influence a decision point, but cannot induce actions outside the plan. We identify potential influence patterns mirroring these first two risks for WebArena tasks in Table 2, Appendix A. PTE eliminates the third category by design, even for safe with influence tasks. It prevents scenarios where the adversary hijacks the agent’s objective and redirects it toward unrelated goals, such as data exfiltration or destructive actions. ReAct, on the other hand, remains structurally subject to all three. 

6.3 Practical Gaps in Enabling PTE 

While PTE is a promising design for web agents, several practical gaps remain before it can be deployed. We provide insight into these gaps here, and include a more detailed discussion in Appendix B. 

Observation 1: API discoverability is key to making good plans. Our experience with WebArena suggests that naively exposing all API endpoints to the planner, for example, by turning each endpoint into an MCP tool call, is unrealistic: servers can expose thousands of endpoints, overwhelming the agent’s context. We need an API discovery mechanism to identify relevant sites for a task, and relevant APIs within each site. 8Observation 2: Documentation quality is important for PTE utility. PTE is sensitive to API documentation quality. Without documentation that defines each API’s functionality, signature, parameter semantics, and return structure and types, the agent cannot reliably discover them or know how to call them correctly. Agents also need to know site-specific conventions and data structures to plan optimally, such as GitLab’s “ namespace/repo ” repository formatting, or OneStopShop’s SKU identifier structure. 

Observation 3: Backend APIs are incomplete, client-side SDKs are brittle. Many real-world sites do not expose sufficient REST APIs: WebArena’s Postmill website exposes only 16 REST APIs. Only 33% of Postmill tasks can be completed using these. Client-side SDKs described in Section 4.1 can be used instead, but might require expensive maintenance to update for every UI change. 

Observation 4: PTE requires explicit error handling. Because PTE agents lack dynamic observ-ability, they are brittle to mismatched or underspecified queries. For instance, if an initial search for “COVID location tracker” fails, a ReAct agent would observe the empty result and succeed with a broader query “COVID location”. A PTE agent, lacking programmed recovery, simply terminates. Mitigating this requires extra mechanisms: (1) interactive user clarification to elucidate ambiguous tasks before planning, (2) prompting or training models to emit robust code with explicit retry logic, or (3) generating and evaluating parallel plans for idempotent tasks. 

# 7 Discussion 

PTE provides benefits beyond prompt injection defense. It lowers token cost and latency by allowing the model to plan an efficient execution strategy instead of exploring the action space online. It is easier to debug and verify, because the code can be reasoned about before execution to check policies and identify potential failures. It is more deterministic so programs for common queries can be cached. However, this framework has tradeoffs. It requires an expensive preprocessing step to extract trusted APIs from websites in the form of client-side SDKs, and it is unclear today how best to structure such APIs for optimal utility. These APIs must also be updated as websites evolve, creating a maintenance cost absent from ReAct frameworks. PTE only supports tasks whose control flow can be fully determined from the user prompt. While this covers the vast majority of WebArena tasks, it excludes queries in which the model must rely on external data for future instructions. PTE also requires the right task abstraction: plans that are too low-level become brittle, while plans that are too high-level may hide information needed for execution. Given these limitations, we believe ReAct is superior in three cases: on highly dynamic websites whose structure changes frequently; for exploration-heavy tasks where external data is required during planning; and for workflows spanning many websites, some of which may not be preprocessed. PTE could be used by default for web navigation, and in unfavorable cases it could revert to ReAct. 

Alternative Views. Besides our proposal, alternative prompt-injection defenses try to patch ReAct. Models-based approaches discussed in Section 2.2 teach the model to separate instructions from data. However, (1) these models are not well suited to ReAct, where the data observed during one round needs to influence the action taken in the next, and (2) provide limited robustness to adversarial attacks, as demonstrated recently [30, 20]. A runtime policy monitor could be used to reject actions unaligned with user intent. However, complete mediation is hard to achieve: policies are expensive to write, may not be expressive enough to capture complex semantics, and defenders cannot anticipate all possible situations. The failsafe for uncovered actions would be human review, which adds burden and leads to habituation. Policies could be auto-generated [26] and a model could auto-approve actions [2]. A final alternative is taint-tracking [ 24 ], which labels DOM elements by provenance to isolate untrusted content from the model’s decision-making. While conceptually attractive, this approach suffers from “taint explosion”: strict isolation becomes impractical because many web tasks inherently require processing untrusted data to succeed. 

Research Agenda. This paper introduces plan-then-execute as a safer alternative to ReAct for web agents. More work is needed to make this recommendation practical: (1) Interfaces: standardizing agent-friendly web APIs and automating client-side SDK generation for sites lacking native support; (2) Planner Design: building agents that generate appropriately expressive, task-specific programs using these trusted APIs; (3) Verification & Constraints: statically checking generated programs 9against security policies and strictly constraining quarantined LLM subroutines (e.g., via type verification); and (4) Evaluation: developing comprehensive benchmarks (extending WebArena [ 40 ]) to jointly measure security, utility, and efficiency. 

# 8 Conclusion 

In this paper, we argue that plan-then-execute becomes practical for web agents when agents can write programs that interact with a website via a trusted API. We show that, assuming complete trusted site APIs, all WebArena tasks are compatible with plan-then-execute. We also propose a research agenda for making PTE web agents practical. 

# Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

This research was supported by the KACST-UCB Joint Center on Cybersecurity, OpenAI, the National Science Foundation under grant IIS-2229876 (the ACTION center), Open Philanthropy, Google, the Noyce Foundation and gifts from Accenture, Amazon, AMD, Anyscale, Broadcom, IBM, Intel, Intesa Sanpaolo, Lambda, Lightspeed, Mibura, NVIDIA, Samsung SDS, and SAP. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors. 10 References 

[1] Hengyu An, Jinghuai Zhang, Tianyu Du, Chunyi Zhou, Qingming Li, Tao Lin, and Shouling Ji. IPIGuard: A novel tool dependency graph-based defense against indirect prompt injection in LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15310 , 2025. [2] Anthropic. Claude code auto mode: a safer way to skip permissions. https://www. anthropic.com/engineering/claude-code-auto-mode , 2026. Accessed: 2026-05-06. [3] Luca Beurer-Kellner, Beat Buesser, Ana-Maria Cre¸ tu, Edoardo Debenedetti, Daniel Dobos, Daniel Fabian, Marc Fischer, David Froelicher, Kathrin Grosse, Daniel Naeff, et al. Design patterns for securing llm agents against prompt injections. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08837 ,2025. [4] Sizhe Chen, Julien Piet, Chawin Sitawarin, and David Wagner. Struq: Defending against prompt injection with structured queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06363 , 2024. [5] Sizhe Chen, Arman Zharmagambetov, Saeed Mahloujifar, Kamalika Chaudhuri, David Wagner, and Chuan Guo. Secalign: Defending against prompt injection with preference optimization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05451 , 2024. [6] Manuel Costa, Boris Köpf, Aashish Kolluri, Andrew Paverd, Mark Russinovich, Ahmed Salem, Shruti Tople, Lukas Wutschitz, and Santiago Zanella-Béguelin. Securing AI agents with information-flow control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23643 , 2025. [7] Edoardo Debenedetti, Ilia Shumailov, Tianqi Fan, Jamie Hayes, Nicholas Carlini, Daniel Fabian, Christoph Kern, Chongyang Shi, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramèr. Defeating prompt injections by design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18813 , 2025. [8] Edoardo Debenedetti, Jie Zhang, Mislav Balunovi´ c, Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Florian Tramèr. Agentdojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate prompt injection attacks and defenses for LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13352 , 2024. [9] Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Sam Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:28091–28114, 2023. [10] Ivan Evtimov, Arman Zharmagambetov, Aaron Grattafiori, Chuan Guo, and Kamalika Chaud-huri. WASP: Benchmarking web agent security against prompt injection attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18575 , 2025. [11] Hanna Foerster, Tom Blanchard, Kristina Nikoli´ c, Ilia Shumailov, Cheng Zhang, Robert Mullins, Nicolas Papernot, Florian Tramèr, and Yiren Zhao. Camels can use computers too: System-level security for computer use agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.09923 , 2026. [12] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security , pages 79–90, 2023. [13] Yuyu Guo, Wenjie Yang, Siyuan Yang, Ziyang Liu, Cheng Chen, Yuan Wei, Yun Hu, Yang Huang, Guoliang Hao, Dongsheng Yuan, et al. Opagent: Operator agent for web navigation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.13559 , 2026. [14] Feiran Jia, Tong Wu, Xin Qin, and Anna Squicciarini. The task shield: Enforcing task alignment to defend against indirect prompt injection in LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16682 ,2025. [15] Aashish Kolluri, Rishi Sharma, Manuel Costa, Boris Köpf, Tobias Nießen, Mark Russinovich, Shruti Tople, and Santiago Zanella-Béguelin. Optimizing agent planning for security and autonomy. https://openreview.net/forum?id=g0aVCDY3gS , 2026. ICLR 2026 poster. [16] Yinuo Liu, Ruohan Xu, Xilong Wang, Yuqi Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. WAInjectBench: Benchmarking prompt injection detections for web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01354 ,2025. 11 [17] Yupei Liu, Yuqi Jia, Runpeng Geng, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Formalizing and benchmarking prompt injection attacks and defenses. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) , pages 1831–1847, 2024. [18] Luoxi Meng, Henry Feng, Ilia Shumailov, and Earlence Fernandes. cellmate: Sandboxing browser ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.12594 , 2025. [19] Magnus Müller and Gregor Žuniˇ c. Browser use: Enable ai to control your browser. https: //github.com/browser-use/browser-use , 2024. [20] Milad Nasr, Nicholas Carlini, Chawin Sitawarin, Sander V. Schulhoff, Jamie Hayes, Michael Ilie, Juliette Pluto, Shuang Song, Harsh Chaudhari, Ilia Shumailov, Abhradeep Thakurta, Kai Yuanqing Xiao, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramèr. The attacker moves second: Stronger adaptive attacks bypass defenses against LLM jailbreaks and prompt injections. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09023 , 2025. [21] OpenAI. Computer-using agent: Introducing a universal interface for ai to interact with the digital world. 2025. [22] OWASP GenAI Security Project. Owasp top 10 for large language model applications 2025. 

https://genai.owasp.org/llm-top-10/ , 2025. Accessed 2026-03-19. [23] Julien Piet, Maha Alrashed, Chawin Sitawarin, Sizhe Chen, Zeming Wei, Elizabeth Sun, Basel Alomair, and David Wagner. jatmo: Prompt injection defense by task-specific finetuning. In 

European Symposium on Research in Computer Security , 2024. [24] Edward J Schwartz, Thanassis Avgerinos, and David Brumley. All you ever wanted to know about dynamic taint analysis and forward symbolic execution (but might have been afraid to ask). In 2010 IEEE symposium on Security and privacy , pages 317–331. IEEE, 2010. [25] Yueqi Song, Frank Xu, Shuyan Zhou, and Graham Neubig. Beyond browsing: API-based web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.16464 , 2024. [26] Lillian Tsai and Eugene Bagdasarian. Contextual agent security: A policy for every purpose. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17070 , 2025. Also appeared at HotOS 2025. [27] Eric Wallace, Kai Xiao, Reimar Leike, Lilian Weng, Johannes Heidecke, and Alex Beutel. The instruction hierarchy: Training LLMs to prioritize privileged instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13208 , 2024. [28] Peiran Wang, Yang Liu, Yunfei Lu, Yifeng Cai, Hongbo Chen, Qingyou Yang, Jie Zhang, Jue Hong, and Ye Wu. Agentarmor: Enforcing program analysis on agent runtime trace to defend against prompt injection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01249 , 2025. [29] Xilong Wang, John Bloch, Zedian Shao, Yuepeng Hu, Shuyan Zhou, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Webinject: Prompt injection attack to web agents. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2010–2030, 2025. [30] Yuxin Wen, Arman Zharmagambetov, Ivan Evtimov, Narine Kokhlikyan, Tom Goldstein, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and Chuan Guo. RL is a hammer and LLMs are nails: A simple reinforcement learning recipe for strong prompt injection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04885 ,2025. [31] Tianbao Xie, Fan Zhou, Zhoujun Cheng, Peng Shi, Luoxuan Weng, Yitao Liu, Toh Jing Hua, Junning Zhao, Qian Liu, Che Liu, et al. Openagents: An open platform for language agents in the wild. In ICLR Workshop on Large Language Model (LLM) Agents , 2024. [32] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 ,2022. [33] Rui Ye, Zhongwang Zhang, Kuan Li, Huifeng Yin, Zhengwei Tao, Yida Zhao, Liangcai Su, Liwen Zhang, Zile Qiao, Xinyu Wang, et al. Agentfold: Long-horizon web agents with proactive context folding. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2026. 12 [34] Jingwei Yi, Yueqi Xie, Bin Zhu, Emre Kiciman, Guangzhong Sun, Xing Xie, and Fangzhao Wu. Benchmarking and defending against indirect prompt injection attacks on large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14197 , 2025. [35] Qiusi Zhan, Zhixiang Liang, Zifan Ying, and Daniel Kang. Injecagent: Benchmarking indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02691 , 2024. [36] Chaoyun Zhang, Shilin He, Liqun Li, Si Qin, Yu Kang, Qingwei Lin, and Dongmei Zhang. API agents vs. GUI agents: Divergence and convergence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11069 , 2025. [37] Hanrong Zhang, Jingyuan Huang, Kai Mei, Yifei Yao, Zhenting Wang, Chenlu Zhan, Hongwei Wang, and Yongfeng Zhang. Agent security bench (ASB): Formalizing and benchmarking attacks and defenses in LLM-based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02644 , 2024. [38] Kaiyuan Zhang, Mark Tenenholtz, Kyle Polley, Jerry Ma, Denis Yarats, and Ninghui Li. Browsesafe: Understanding and preventing prompt injection within AI browser agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20597 , 2025. [39] Boyuan Zheng, Boyu Gou, Jihyung Kil, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Gpt-4v(ision) is a generalist web agent, if grounded. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01614 , 2024. [40] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854 , 2023. [41] Jinhao Zhu, Kevin Tseng, Gil Vernik, Xiao Huang, Shishir G. Patil, Vivian Fang, and Raluca Ada Popa. Miniscope: A least privilege framework for authorizing tool calling agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.11147 , 2025. 13 Type Example Task Security Implication OneStopShop (38 cases)                             

> Semantic product filtering “Find cheapest dock with ≥11 slots” Constraint not statically enforceable due to format heterogeneity Review mention extraction “Find reviews mentioning X” Requires semantic scan of user-generated content
> Wikipedia (21 cases)
> Content-dependent extrac-tion “Find birthplace of X” Execution plan fixed; output de-pends on page content
> Reddit (23 cases)
> Post/comment filtering “Find posts recommending a single book” LLM classification influences bounded selection
> Map (27 cases)
> Knowledge-based resolu-tion “Liberty Bell city” Requires background knowledge grounding Subjective ranking “Top CS school in Massachusetts” Requires heuristic or LLM-based ranking
> GitLab (19 cases)
> MR comment interpretation “Reply if author responded” Untrusted content affects branching decisions Subjective repository selec-tion “Clone the best GAN repo” LLM judges “best” but execution is bounded Cross-site content transfer “Create repo from Wikipedia filmog-raphy” External content affects payload but not control flow
> CMS (33 cases)
> Sentiment aggregation “Show customers dissatisfied with X” Requires semantic classification of reviews Moderation actions “Delete negative reviews” Content classification gates fixed API calls

Table 2: Examples of Safe-with-Influence task patterns and their security implications. 

# A Safe-with-Influence task patterns 

Safe-with-influence does not imply control-flow compromise, only semantic dependency within a fixed execution graph. Table 2 characterizes why influence arises. 

# B Practical Gaps 

Observation 1: API discoverability is key to making good plans. Each server can expose hundreds or even thousands of APIs. When a task spans multiple websites, the number of available endpoints can grow quickly beyond what can be placed in the agent’s context window. Even when the endpoints fit in context, a very large tool set can degrade the agent’s ability to select the correct endpoint. A better API discovery mechanism is therefore necessary for PTE planning. In our investigation, representing each server’s API surface as a Swagger 2.0 JSON file worked best. Each server had its own JSON file containing endpoint parameters, return types, and descriptions. During planning, the agent first identifies which server or servers are relevant to the task, then opens the corresponding JSON file to select endpoints. Next, the agent is given a compressed representation of the APIs, consisting of endpoint summaries rather than the full request and response schemas. After relevant endpoints are selected, the full schema for the selected endpoints are passed in to build an executable plan. We also tried GraphQL over REST APIs, but found that GraphQL made discovery harder: deep and often circular nested queries obscured primitive parameter and return types, causing the agent to struggle to identify valid endpoints and produce executable plans. 

Observation 2: Documentation quality is important for PTE utility. The planning stage relies on documentation that concretely defines each tool’s functionality, signature, parameter semantics, and return structure. Without such documentation, endpoints may exist but remain unusable: the 14 agent cannot reliably discover them or know how to call them correctly. Websites also often have site-specific conventions that should be included as part of the documentation. For example, OneStopShop’s search requires words to be padded with % signs instead of a regular space for words. Postmill’s REST APIs need a special header X-Experimental-API with every request sent. GitLab identifies repositories using strings of the form namespace/repo . Without hints about identifier formats, the agent may not know whether the task already contains an ID that can be passed directly to an endpoint, or whether it must first call other endpoints to resolve the ID. 

Observation 3: API coverage is often incomplete. Many real-world sites lack sufficient REST API support. In WebArena’s Postmill website, only 16 REST APIs are exposed. These APIs are limited and cannot complete the majority of WebArena’s Postmill tasks, with only 33% of 129 tasks doable. Even well-documented platforms such as GitLab, which expose hundreds of APIs, still contain tasks that can only be completed through the UI because no REST API supports the required functionality, such as generating the RSS token. One possible workaround is to create a website-specific SDK that simulates user actions in the browser via Playwright. At an abstract level, the agent can still plan before executing the task via APIs implemented client-side through browser automation rather than direct REST calls. This approach introduces practical costs as it requires a prior site exploration phase, possibly using a logged-in account, before PTE can execute tasks. This also raises security concerns as the agent may need to explore an untrusted and potentially unsafe server in order to construct the Playwright SDK. 

Observation 4: PTE requires explicit error handling. Because PTE agents defer feedback until after plan execution, the agent cannot observe intermediate environment signals (e.g., empty search results) and adapt its behavior accordingly. As a result, PTE agents are more brittle to mismatched or underspecified queries. For example, if a user mistyped “furnture” when prompting the agent to search for “furniture products”, the PTE agent might search the misspelled keyword literally, returning with no results. A ReAct agent would correctly recognize that there might be a spelling mistake and iteratively replan the search query until there was a successful return call with information. In contrast, without explicit recovery logic, a PTE agent may terminate early with no results. This limitation is not inherent to PTE, but does require additional mechanisms to handle. We propose several approaches to incorporate explicit error handling into PTE systems. First, during the planning phase, the agent can engage in multiple rounds of user-agent interaction to clarify potentially ambiguous tasks (e.g., whether “my projects” refers to projects assigned to the user or projects created by the user). Second, training or prompting models to emit reliable code with explicit error-recovery and retry behavior. Finally, the planning agent can generate multiple contingent plans with different parameter or endpoint variations, execute all candidate plans, analyze the returned results, and select the best output. 15