Title: enclawed: A Configurable, Sector-Neutral Hardening Framework for Single-User AI Assistant Gateways

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.16838v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 00:32:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# enclawed : A Configurable, Sector-Neutral Hardening Framework for Single-User AI Assistant Gateways 

Alfredo Metere Metere Consulting, LLC. 

alfredo.metere@metereconsulting.com 

April 17, 2026 

Abstract 

We present enclawed , a hard-fork hardening framework built on top of the OpenClaw single-user personal artificial intelligence (AI) assistant gateway. enclawed targets deploy-ments that need attestable peer trust, deny-by-default external connectivity, signed-module loading, and a tamper-evident audit trail — typically regulated industries such as finan-cial services, healthcare, defense contracting, regulated R&D, and government enclaves. The framework ships in two flavors: an open flavor that preserves OpenClaw compatibil-ity while still emitting audit, classification, and data-loss-prevention (DLP) signals, and an 

enclaved flavor that activates strict allowlists, Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) cryptographic-module assertion, mandatory module-manifest signature verification, and high-assurance peer attestation for the Model Context Protocol (MCP). The classifica-tion ladder is fully data-driven: a deploying organization selects from five built-in presets (generic, US-government, healthcare, financial services, three-tier) or supplies its own JSON. We accompany the implementation with a security review, a 204-case test suite (146 unit tests, 58 adversarial pen-tests for tamper detection, signature forgery, egress bypass, trust-root mutation, DLP evasion, prompt injection, and code injection), real-time human-in-the-loop control (per-agent pause / resume / stop and approval queues), a memory-bounded secure transaction buffer with rollback (default cap 50% of system RAM, configurable), a strict-mode TypeScript typecheck of all 22 framework files, and a GitHub Actions workflow ready for continuous integration. enclawed is a hardening framework, not an ac-credited compliance certification. The deploying organization remains responsible for hardware, validated cryptographic modules, certified facilities, and assessor sign-off. 

# 1 Introduction 

Generative AI has crossed quickly from prototype into the operational fabric of regulated in-dustries. Financial-services firms use large language models (LLMs) for research summarization touching material non-public information (MNPI); healthcare systems apply them to protected health information (PHI); defense contractors handle controlled unclassified information (CUI) and International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR)-controlled materials; legal teams rely on them for privileged-counsel work; pharmaceutical R&D operates on embargoed clinical-trial data. Each of these settings is governed by frameworks that pre-date generative AI but ap-ply to it directly — the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) [8], the European Union General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [7], the Payment Card Indus-try Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) [9], the International Organization for Standardization / International Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC) 27001 [5], the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Service Organization Control 2 (SOC 2) trust-services criteria [6], the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication 800-53 [1], and 1

> arXiv:2604.16838v1 [cs.CR] 18 Apr 2026

NIST 800-171 [4] — and increasingly by AI-specific regimes such as the European Union Arti-ficial Intelligence Act (EU AI Act) [28], the NIST AI Risk Management Framework (NIST AI RMF) [26], and ISO/IEC 42001 [27] governing artificial-intelligence management systems. Two observations motivate this work. First, the dominant open-source multi-channel AI gateways were designed for the consumer “personal-assistant” market and ship with cloud-first defaults that are fundamentally incompatible with regulated-enclave deployment. Second, the security failure modes of generative AI are no longer hypothetical: documented incidents include training-data extraction at scale [31, 32], indirect prompt injection through retrieved content [20, 21, 22], the 2023 Samsung corpus leak through interactive cloud application programming interfaces (APIs), and the 2024 Moffatt v. Air Canada decision [35] establishing operator liability for AI assistant outputs. The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) Top 10 for LLM Applications [29] and MITRE Adversarial Threat Landscape for Artificial-Intelligence Systems (ATLAS) [30] now codify the relevant attack surface in industry-recognized form. 

1.1 The regulated-enterprise AI gap 

Personal AI gateways such as OpenClaw [25] exemplify the problem. The upstream project’s po-sitioning is explicit: a single-user assistant that “answers you on the channels you already use,” bundling 24+ chat platforms (WhatsApp, Telegram, Slack, Discord, Signal, iMessage, Matrix, Microsoft Teams, and more) and 40+ cloud LLM providers (OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, Mis-tral, Groq, AWS Bedrock, Azure OpenAI, OpenRouter, Fireworks, etc.) by default. Its plugin model encourages community-published modules installed via npm with no enforced signature verification. Its policy posture is permissive: external channels and providers are enabled the moment credentials are configured. Audit, classification, and DLP are not part of the frame-work’s contract. For a community user this is the right design. For a financial-services trading floor han-dling MNPI, a hospital system processing PHI, a defense contractor with CUI access, or any organization subject to ISO 27001 / SOC 2 / HIPAA / PCI / Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) / U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) / U.S. Department of Energy (DoE) controls, every one of those defaults becomes an explicit policy violation: 

• External egress to consumer messaging platforms violates boundary protection (NIST 800-53 SC-7 [1]) and information-flow control (AC-4). 

• Cloud LLM API usage routes regulated content through third parties whose data-processing terms typically permit retention and, until contractually disclaimed, training reuse — in direct conflict with HIPAA business-associate constraints [8, §164.308(b)], GDPR Arti-cle 28 processor obligations [7], and most data-residency policies. 

• Unsigned community plugins expose the gateway to supply-chain compromise — the threat the NIST Secure Software Development Framework (SSDF) [33] addresses through SI-7 / SR-3 / SR-4, and which the U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) / National Security Agency (NSA) / Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) joint guidance on AI deployment [34] explicitly calls out as a top operational risk. 

• Permissive defaults with no audit chain make incident reconstruction impossible, conflict-ing with NIST 800-53 AU-2/3/9/10 and HIPAA §164.312(b) audit-control requirements. 

• No classification labels means an output may carry PHI / MNPI / CUI to a recipient cleared for none of it, with the host silent at every step. 21.2 Why a configuration-only fix is insufficient 

A natural response is “just disable the cloud channels and providers, add a logging plugin, and require approved modules.” We argue this is not enough, for three structural reasons. 

Defaults are policy. A platform whose out-of-the-box state contains 78 forbidden mod-ules invites accidental enablement at every upgrade, every onboarding, every plugin install. Removing the modules from the source tree — not just from the configuration — is the only durable defense, because it makes the unsafe state unreachable rather than merely unselected .Compliance posture must be a property of the binary, not a property of a configuration file an operator can revert. 

The plugin-loading path is the trust boundary. OpenClaw’s plugin loader does not verify signatures, does not consult any trust root, and does not reason about clearance. Adding “a logging plugin” is itself a plugin — it inherits the same unsigned, unverified loading path. The trust boundary must be below the plugin layer, enforced by the host before any plugin code runs, and locked against post-boot mutation. Retrofitting this into a project whose contract assumes ambient plugin trust is a re-architecture, not a configuration. 

Upstream cannot adopt these constraints. OpenClaw’s product identity — a multi-channel personal assistant — is incompatible with deny-by-default external connectivity, FIPS-required boot, mandatory signature verification, and attested peer trust. Even if upstream maintainers were willing to accept patches that imposed those defaults, doing so would break their published contract with thousands of community deployments. Forking is therefore not merely convenient but structurally necessary: the regulated-enclave product must diverge from the consumer-assistant product at the binary level. We say explicitly that upstream OpenClaw 

will not adopt these constraints, not because the upstream maintainers are inattentive to se-curity — they are not — but because the constraints are incompatible with the product they ship. 

1.3 Three design commitments 

This paper describes enclawed , a hard fork of OpenClaw rebuilt around three design commit-ments that address the gap above: 1. Always-on policy. The classification framework activates unconditionally at process start, before any plugin or transit module is imported, so downstream code observes a guarded environment from the first instruction. There is no “compatibility mode” that disables the framework in production. 2. Two flavors. An open flavor preserves OpenClaw behavior with the framework running in warn-only mode for development and non-regulated deployment; an enclaved flavor enforces strict deny-by-default policy, FIPS assertion, mandatory module-manifest sign-ing, and attested peer trust. Selection is by a single environment variable read once at boot and then immutable for the process lifetime. 3. Data-driven classification. The level ladder is not hardcoded; the deploying organiza-tion selects from five built-in presets (sector-neutral generic, U.S.-government, healthcare-HIPAA, financial-services, three-tier) or supplies its own JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) document. The framework is sector-neutral by default — a U.S.-government preset and DoE Q-clearance and L-clearance templates exist as opt-ins, not as the canon-ical defaults. The framework is sector-neutral by default. Built-in presets cover financial services (MNPI / privileged-counsel), healthcare (PHI / sensitive PHI), a generic three-tier scheme, and full US-government markings, with the canonical defaults industry-generic ( PUBLIC < INTERNAL <

CONFIDENTIAL < RESTRICTED < RESTRICTED-PLUS ). 31.4 Comparison with the broader landscape 

OpenClaw is one of several open-source projects that mediate between a human user and one or more language models. Adjacent offerings include LibreChat [43], Open WebUI [44], Any-thingLLM [45], Jan.ai [46], Lobe Chat [47] — multi-provider chat front-ends — plus agent-orchestration frameworks such as AutoGen [48] and the LangChain ecosystem [49]. A separate cluster of AI-security tools targets narrower slices of the problem: NeMo Guardrails [50] and Llama Guard [51] focus on content moderation at the model boundary; Lakera Guard [52] addresses prompt injection as a hosted scanning service. We surveyed each of these against the security properties enclawed is designed to deliver, summarized in Table 1. The honest picture is that no other publicly-available offering, as docu-mented at the time of writing, combines mandatory module signing, a classification lattice with a configurable scheme, tamper-evident audit, real-time human-in-the-loop control, a memory-bounded rollback buffer, and attested peer trust into a single cohesive framework that runs entirely on locally-hosted inference. The closest competitors each address one or two of these properties: 

• Local-LLM front-ends (Open WebUI, AnythingLLM, Jan.ai) deliver point (1) — they avoid cloud egress by binding to local runtimes — but ship without policy, classification, audit, or signed-module enforcement. Their plugin or knowledge-base ingest paths are unverified, which is the same supply-chain gap noted in §1.1 for OpenClaw. 

• Multi-provider gateways (LibreChat, Lobe Chat) prioritize reach over restriction; cloud providers are first-class citizens and removal requires user effort that is not enforced. Their plugin / preset distribution is community-driven without cryptographic attestation. 

• Agent frameworks (AutoGen, LangChain ecosystem) are libraries rather than gateways, and the security posture is whatever the embedding application provides. They have no notion of deployment-flavor strictness, no built-in egress allowlist, and no rollback on partial-failure of an agent’s actions. 

• Content-guardrail systems (NeMo Guardrails, Llama Guard) address output filtering — a complement to, not a replacement for, classification-driven flow control. They do not enforce information-flow rules, do not produce a tamper-evident audit trail, and do not gate module loading. 

• SaaS prompt-injection scanners (Lakera Guard) by design route content through an ex-ternal service, which is incompatible with the no-egress requirement of regulated enclaves. Where a competitor genuinely addresses one of enclawed’s properties, enclawed adopts the same primitive rather than reinventing it: the DLP scanner and prompt-shield (§4.5, §8) are deliberately a thin keyword-and-regex layer because content-classification depth is the job of dedicated tools like Llama Guard, which a deploying organization can wire in addition. en-clawed’s contribution is the host-level chassis that any of these complementary tools can sit inside, with the chassis itself taking responsibility for the properties the tools cannot deliver alone (signed module loading, classification lattice, deny-by-default policy, attested peer trust, HITL controls, rollback). 

Non-claim. This work does not constitute a certification. Real audits — ISO 27001, SOC 2, the Health Information Trust Alliance (HITRUST) common security framework, FedRAMP, DoD/DoE high-side Authority to Operate (ATO), PCI DSS Report on Compliance (RoC) — all require accredited hardware, validated cryptographic modules (FIPS 140-3 [2] where the regime demands), certified facilities, evaluation by a qualified assessor, and management sign-off. enclawed is a code-level scaffold; the gaps a deploying organization must close are catalogued in Section 11. 4Project Local-only Mand. signed Class. Tamper- DLP HITL Tx Attested Sector-neutral by default modules lattice evident audit at output stop rollback peer trust config scheme enclawed (this work) yes (enclaved) yes yes yes yes yes yes yes (MCP) yes OpenClaw [25] no no no no no no no no no LibreChat [43] no no no no no no no no no Open WebUI [44] yes no no no no no no no no AnythingLLM [45] opt-in no no no no no no no no Jan.ai [46] yes no no no no no no no no Lobe Chat [47] no no no no no no no no no AutoGen [48] N/A (library) no no no no partial no no no LangChain [49] N/A (library) no no no partial partial no no no NeMo Guardrails [50] N/A (component) no no no yes no no no no Llama Guard [51] N/A (model) no no no yes no no no no Lakera Guard [52] no (SaaS) no no no yes no no no no 

Table 1: Landscape comparison. Properties documented as of the projects’ publicly-stated features at time of writing; “partial” means the property is achievable but not enforced by the project itself, and “N/A” means the project is a different kind of artifact (library, component, model) rather than a hostable gateway and the column does not directly apply. enclawed is the only entry that combines all nine properties as a host-level framework around which the others can be composed. 

Contributions. 

• A two-flavor classification framework with sector-neutral defaults and built-in presets for finance, healthcare, government, R&D, and a minimal three-tier scheme. 

• A zero-trust blockchained key broker (§4.7) for hybrid deployments that cannot achieve full enclave isolation: K-of-N quorum across independent providers, signed attestations, an Ed25519 broker-signed hash-chained ledger, and CONSENSUS plus THRESHOLD-XOR combining modes. 

• A user-configurable classification scheme model that accepts arbitrary level vocabularies, validated against rank-contiguity and name-uniqueness invariants. 

• An Ed25519 module-signing system with a per-signer clearance-approval trust root and boot-time pre-verification, plus an analogous attestation model for Model Context Proto-col peers. 

• A hash-chained, append-only audit log with concurrent-append serialization, deep payload sanitization against log injection, and independent third-party verification. 

• An adversarial test suite of 58 cases targeting tamper detection, signature forgery, egress bypass, trust-root mutation, DLP evasion, prompt injection, and code injection, alongside 146 unit tests, all passing on Node 22. 

• A GitHub Actions workflow that runs the suites on push, PR, and weekly cron, plus a strict-mode TypeScript typecheck of all 22 framework files. 

# 2 Background and Threat Model 

2.1 Choice of access-control model 

Information security has produced a small library of formal access control models, each empha-sizing a different property. We surveyed the candidates against three criteria: (i) the primary risk in our deployments is unauthorized disclosure of regulated data, not modification or fraud; (ii) the policy must be mandatory — imposed by the host, not configurable by users or modules; (iii) the ladder of sensitivity levels must be reusable across sectors that already think in tier vocabularies (PHI, MNPI, CUI, etc.). Table 2 summarizes the alternatives we considered. 5Model Primary prop-erty Why not the primary fit Use in enclawed                                       

> Bell-LaPadula [10] confidentiality —primary axis Biba [36] integrity does not constrain disclosure complementary, future work Clark-Wilson [37] integrity via well-formed trans-actions overengineered for chat-mediated AI; assumes app-defined IVPs inspires the rollback buffer (§4.6) Brewer-Nash [38] dynamic conflict-of-interest separa-tion sector-specific (financial); or-thogonal to tier flow easily layered via com-partments Harrison-Ruzzo-Ullman (HRU) access matrix general expres-siveness undecidable safety; no enforced lattice rejected Role-based access control (RBAC) [39] role-based autho-rization no notion of data sensitivity; group →resource only rejected as primary axis Attribute-based access control (ABAC) [40] attribute expres-sions expressive but harder to for-mally verify; risk of policy drift adopted within com-partments / releasabil-ity slots

Table 2: Access-control model survey. Bell-LaPadula is selected as the primary axis because the deployments enclawed targets are fundamentally confidentiality-driven (PHI, MNPI, CUI, embargoed research). Biba’s integrity dual and Clark-Wilson’s transaction discipline are com-plementary and inform §4.6 (rollback buffer); RBAC and ABAC are layered as compartment / releasability assignments rather than as the primary flow rule. Concretely we chose Bell-LaPadula for five reasons: 1. Confidentiality is the first-order risk. Every regime in Section 11’s gap list is a confi-dentiality regime first (PHI under HIPAA [8], MNPI under U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) rules, CUI under NIST 800-171 [4], classified information under NIST 800-53 [1]). Integrity and availability matter, but only after confidentiality is established. 2. The lattice is mechanizable. Dominance, least upper-bound, and reading/writing predi-cates are simple, total, decidable functions on integer ranks plus subset tests on compart-ment sets. They are easier to formally verify than the rule-evaluation of Clark-Wilson or the policy expressions of ABAC. 3. It maps directly to existing vocabularies. US-government classification, healthcare PHI tiers, and financial MNPI all naturally express as a rank ladder plus optional compart-ments. The same code consumes any of them via the configurable scheme of §6. 4. It is mandatory by construction. The lattice is a property of the host, evaluated on every label comparison. Modules cannot override it. 5. Biba and Clark-Wilson compose orthogonally. A future integrity layer can use Biba’s no-read-down / no-write-up on a parallel axis without modifying the existing lattice; the transaction buffer (§4.6) already implements the well-formed transaction discipline of Clark-Wilson at the action layer. 

2.2 Bell-LaPadula formal model 

Each subject and object carries a label ⟨ℓ, C, R ⟩ where ℓ is a numeric rank, C a set of compart-ments, and R a set of releasability caveats. Label a dominates label b (a ⪰ b) iff ℓa ≥ ℓb and 

Cb ⊆ Ca. Reading is allowed when the subject dominates the object (no-read-up); writing is allowed when the object dominates the subject (no-write-down). Combination yields the least 6upper bound. This lattice arithmetic is implemented in src/enclawed/classification.ts 

and is independent of the level vocabulary. 

2.3 Threat model 

We assume a single-tenant, single-user gateway running inside a high-trust enclave. The user holds the deploying organization’s highest applicable trust tier. The system must: 1. never egress to the public Internet or any external channel/provider; 2. use only locally-hosted inference (e.g. Ollama [18], vLLM [16], LM Studio [19], SGLang [17], local NVIDIA Inference Microservice (NIM)); 3. refuse to render or echo data above the user’s authorized tier; 4. refuse to write data below its origin classification (no-write-down); 5. produce a tamper-evident audit trail of every model interaction; 6. encrypt every persistent artifact at rest with a key bound to organization-controlled hard-ware; 7. block known sensitive-data markings, secrets, and personally identifiable information (PII) from leaving the gateway via any output channel; 8. make any deviation a hard, loud failure — not silent degradation. We map these requirements to multiple control frameworks simultaneously (Table 3): NIST 800-53 [1], ISO/IEC 27001 [5], NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 2.0 [3], SOC 2 trust-services criteria (TSC) [6], GDPR [7], the HIPAA Security Rule [8], PCI DSS [9], and the Cyber-security Maturity Model Certification (CMMC) layered on NIST 800-171 [4]. The deployment-side complement to this mapping — the controls the deploying organization must still deliver — is enumerated in Section 11. 

2.4 Out of scope 

The framework does not provide accredited cryptography (FIPS 140-3 or NSA Type-1), an ac-credited cross-domain solution (CDS), identity binding (Common Access Card (CAC), Personal Identity Verification (PIV), Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML), or OpenID Connect (OIDC)), kernel-level mandatory access control (SELinux Multi-Level Security (MLS)), Write-Once-Read-Many (WORM) audit shipping, or facility security. These remain the deploying organization’s responsibility. Section 11 enumerates each. 

# 3 Architecture 

3.1 Two flavors 

enclawed selects a flavor at boot via the ENCLAWED_FLAVOR environment variable. Table 4 contrasts the two. 7Control area  enclawed surface  NIST 800-53  ISO 27001  NIST CSF  SOC 2  GDPR  HIPAA 

> Access enforcement  classification.ts , policy.ts  AC-3  A.9.4  PR.AC-4  CC5.1, CC6.1  Art. 32(1)(b)  164.312(a)(1) Information flow  egress-guard.ts  AC-4, SC-7  A.13.1  PR.PT-4  CC6.6  Art. 32(1)(b)  164.312(e)(1) Security attributes  classification.ts  + scheme  AC-16  A.8.2  PR.DS-5  CC1.4  Art. 5(1)(f)  164.308(a)(2) Audit logging  audit-log.ts  + subsystem  patch  AU-2/3/9/10  A.12.4  DE.CM-1, DE.AE-3  CC7.2, CC7.3  Art. 30, 32(1)(d)  164.312(b) Crypto module  crypto-fips.assertFipsMode()  IA-7, SC-13  A.10.1  PR.DS-1  CC6.1  Art. 32(1)(a)  164.312(a)(2)(iv) Encryption at rest / in transit  crypto-fips.ts  SC-8/13/28  A.10.1, A.13.2  PR.DS-1/2  CC6.1, CC6.7  Art. 32(1)(a)  164.312(e)(2)(ii) Continuous monitoring  audit + subsystem + egress.onDeny  SI-4  A.12.4  DE.CM, DE.AE  CC7.2  Art. 32(1)(d)  164.308(a)(1)(ii)(D) Data leakage / DLP  dlp-scanner.ts  SI-12  A.13.2.3  PR.DS-5  CC6.7  Art. 5(1)(f)  164.312(e) Memory hygiene  zeroize.ts  MP-6, SI-16  A.8.3  PR.IP-6  CC6.5  Art. 32(1)(a)  164.310(d)(2)(i) Least functionality  module deletions (Sec. 3.2)  CM-7  A.9.1  PR.AC-3  CC6.3  Art. 25  164.312(a)(1) Module integrity  module-signing  + trust-root  SI-7, CM-5, SR-3/4  A.12.5, A.14.2.5  PR.IP-1, PR.DS-6  CC8.1  Art. 32(1)(b)  164.312(c)(1) Peer attestation  mcp-attested  IA-3, IA-9, AC-3(11)  A.13.1.1  PR.AC-7  CC6.1  Art. 32(1)(b)  164.312(d)
> Table 3:  Control mapping.  Each row links a framework surface to the corresponding requirement in seven major frameworks; CMMC L2/L3 inherits NIST 800-171 [4] and PCI DSS [9] adds Req. 3, 4, 7, 10, 11 alongside NIST 800-53. The deploying organization picks the column that fits its regime. (Rendered on a dedicated landscape page; cells use natural-width  l columns and the whole table is uniformly scaled to fill the page.)

8Aspect open (default) enclaved                    

> Channel/provider/host allowlists not enforced strict deny-by-default Module signatures warn-only required, must verify Signer-clearance ap-proval informational required, exact match FIPS assertion at boot off (configurable) on (default) Trust root mutation post-boot permitted locked
> globalThis.fetch re-assignment permitted frozen non-configurable Module without mani-fest loaded with warning rejected MCP peer attestation verified, fail →warn verified, fail →deny

Table 4: Flavor matrix. Both flavors run the same framework code; the distinction is enforce-ment strictness. 

3.2 Module set after deletion 

The fork removes 78 cloud module directories from the upstream extensions/ tree: 25 cloud channels (WhatsApp, Telegram, Slack, Discord, Signal, iMessage, Matrix, MS Teams, etc.), 45 cloud LLM providers (OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, Mistral, Groq, AWS Bedrock, Azure Ope-nAI, OpenRouter, Fireworks, etc.), and 8 external search/browser/ webhook modules (Brave, DuckDuckGo, Exa, Firecrawl, SearXNG, Tavily, Browser, Webhooks). 35 modules remain, all local or local-capable (Ollama, vLLM, LM Studio, SGLang, local NVIDIA NIM, ComfyUI, the media/memory/speech cores, openshell, qa-channel, phone-control, device-pair, diagnostics-otel for local-only collectors). One new module ships: mcp-attested , described in Section 7. 

3.3 Runtime singleton and bootstrap 

Activation is a single call at the top of src/entry.ts , before any plugin or transit module is imported: 

const { bootstrapEnclawed } = await import("./enclawed/bootstrap.js"); await bootstrapEnclawed(); bootstrapEnclawed() reads the flavor and classification scheme from the environment, loads the policy, opens the audit log, installs the egress guard (with freeze:true in enclaved ), pre-verifies every module manifest under extensions/ , locks the trust root in enclaved , and stores the runtime on a Symbol.for("enclawed.runtime") slot of globalThis so downstream patches can consult it without creating import cycles. The boot record (with active scheme id, flavor, FIPS state, and allowlist contents) is the genesis hash-chain entry. 

# 4 Implementation 

The framework is delivered in two parallel surfaces: a TypeScript (TS) twin under src/enclawed/ 

that bundles with the upstream OpenClaw build, and a canonical reference under enclawed/src/ 

written in plain Node ECMAScript Modules ( .mjs ) with zero runtime dependencies. The canon-ical surface runs under node –test without pnpm install , which keeps the standalone security suite cheap to exercise and trivial to audit. Table 5 summarizes file counts and lines of code per tree. 9Surface (tree) Files LOC                      

> enclawed-oss/ (open source, MIT)
> TypeScript framework ( src/enclawed/*.ts , integration shims) 22 ∼2,500 Canonical .mjs reference ( enclawed/src/ )17 ∼1,450 Standalone unit + pen tests ( enclawed/test/ )19 ∼1,700 Upstream patches (4 files) 4+82
> src/entry.ts +10
> src/plugins/channel-validation.ts +27
> src/plugins/provider-validation.ts +27
> src/logging/subsystem.ts +18
> enclawed-enclaved/ (closed source, depends on OSS)
> Zero-trust key broker (TS + MJS + tests) 3∼880
> mcp-attested module (TS + tests + signed manifest) 5∼305 Reference classified-profile config 141

Table 5: Code footprint of the two repositories. The OSS repository is self-contained; the closed repository consumes the OSS repository as a git submodule and reaches into it via relative paths. 

Repository layout: two git repositories with a submodule boundary. The project is split into two independent git repositories , each with its own license and remote, at the repository boundary: 

• enclawed-oss — open-source, MIT-licensed, self-contained, public-bound git repository. Houses the OpenClaw fork base, the framework primitives (classification, policy, au-dit, DLP, crypto wrapper, zeroize, module signing, trust root, HITL, transaction buffer, prompt shield, egress guard), the canonical .mjs reference, the standalone test suite, this paper, and all open / local-capable extensions/ (Ollama, vLLM, LM Studio, SGLang, ComfyUI, qa-channel, openshell, the media / memory / speech cores, etc.). 

• enclawed-enclaved — closed-source extensions, proprietary all-rights-reserved, private-bound git repository. Houses the zero-trust blockchained key broker (§4.7), the bundled 

mcp-attested reference module (§7), and the reference classified-profile config. Con-sumes enclawed-oss as a git submodule (.gitmodules pins a specific OSS commit; for sibling GitHub hosting the URL is ../enclawed-oss , which resolves to the public OSS repository at the same organization). git clone –recurse-submodules pulls both halves in one step; closed-tree imports use relative paths into the populated submodule (e.g. ../../enclawed-oss/src/enclawed/audit-log.js from src/enclawed-secure/ ). The dependency direction is strict: enclawed-enclaved → enclawed-oss , never the re-verse. Removing the entire closed repository must leave the OSS repository fully buildable and testable. Each repository ships its own GitHub Actions workflow: the OSS workflow runs the OSS suite alone; the closed-tree workflow uses actions/checkout@v4 with submodules: recursive to fetch the OSS half in one step, then runs the closed-tree suite plus a manifest-signature verification step over every signed module the closed tree bundles. This is a deliberate open core arrangement: the parts that benefit most from broad com-munity review — the classification model, the audit-log primitive, the module-signing toolkit, the prompt shield — are open. The parts that carry distribution-controlled value to the de-ploying organization — the zero-trust key broker that mediates between the host and exter-nal custodians, the attested-MCP reference module with its real signed manifest, the curated classified-profile config — ship under separate licensing in a private repository that pins the OSS submodule by commit hash. 10 4.1 Hash-chained audit log 

Every record is canonicalized as JSON with sorted keys, prepended with the previous record’s SHA-256, and hashed. Three properties matter: 

• Tamper detection. Editing a record in place breaks the chain at the next record’s prevHash 

comparison, which verifyChain() reports as brokenAt .

• Concurrent-write safety. append() chains every write onto an internal Promise queue so two simultaneous callers cannot both consume the same lastHash . Without this guard, parallel emitters (e.g. the egress-guard onDeny callback racing with createSubsystemLogger )would produce a self-inconsistent chain. 

• Log-injection neutralization. A deepSanitize pass strips C0 control characters from every string in type , actor , level , and the entire payload tree, replacing them with U+FFFD. This both prevents an attacker from spoofing a fake JSONL record by embedding a newline in a payload string, and ensures the on-disk bytes match the bytes that were hashed. 

__proto__ , constructor , and prototype keys are filtered out before canonicalization so a payload object cannot smuggle prototype-pollution shapes into the audit hash. 

4.2 Egress guard 

installEgressGuard() replaces globalThis.fetch with a wrapper that resolves the target hostname via the Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group (WHATWG) URL parser (yielding case-normalized hostnames, ignoring the Host header, and rejecting embedded credentials) and checks against an allowlist. In the enclaved flavor the property is set via 

Object.defineProperty with writable:false and configurable:false , making subsequent reassignment throw under ECMAScript Modules (ESM) strict mode. The guard explicitly does not protect against raw net.Socket , dgram , Domain Name System (DNS) resolutions inside native modules, or child processes; the deploying organization must layer kernel-level egress controls ( nftables , extended Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF), network namespaces, optional one-way diode) on top. 

4.3 Configurable classification scheme 

A scheme is a JSON document conforming to: 

{"id": "acme-2026", "description": "ACME Corp internal data classification policy v3.2", "levels": [ { "rank": 0, "canonicalName": "Public", "aliases": ["P"] }, { "rank": 1, "canonicalName": "Internal", "aliases": ["I"] }, { "rank": 2, "canonicalName": "Customer Data", "aliases": [] }, { "rank": 3, "canonicalName": "Privileged", "aliases": ["legal"] } ], "validCompartments": ["FINANCE", "ENG", "LEGAL"], "validReleasability": ["NDA", "EYES_ONLY"] }parseClassificationScheme() enforces three invariants: ranks must be contiguous start-ing at zero; every name (canonical and alias) must be unique across the whole scheme after case-insensitive normalization; non-empty levels list. The active scheme governs format() , parse() ,

makeLabel() range validation, manifest clearance validation, and required-tier checks at the 11 MCP attestation layer. Five presets ship out of the box: enclawed-default (six tiers; generic + US-gov merged), us-government (UNCLASSIFIED to TOP SECRET//SCI), healthcare-hipaa 

(PHI / Sensitive-PHI / Research-Embargoed), financial-services (MNPI / Privileged-Counsel), 

generic-3-tier (Public / Internal / Restricted). 

4.4 DLP scanner 

A regex-based scanner with three pattern families: sensitive-data markings (industry banners, U.S.-government classification banners, DoE Restricted Data, Sensitive Compartmented Infor-mation (SCI) codewords, distribution caveats); cloud and vendor secrets (Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google Cloud Platform (GCP) service account, Microsoft Azure storage key, GitHub, GitLab, OpenAI, Anthropic, Slack, Stripe, JSON Web Tokens (JWTs), Privacy-Enhanced Mail (PEM)-encoded private keys); and international PII (email address, ITU-T E.164 phone num-ber, credit-card primary account number (PAN), International Bank Account Number (IBAN), U.S. Social Security Number (SSN)). Input length is capped at 1 MiB by default to bound CPU exposure to regular-expression denial-of-service (ReDoS)-shaped patterns; callers may pass onOversize:’truncate’ to scan the prefix. Severity levels ( low , medium , high , critical )drive a redact() entry point that replaces matches above a threshold with [REDACTED] . The scanner is a backstop, not a primary control: regex DLP cannot detect paraphrased sensitive content, optical-character-recognition-only content, or any pattern not in its catalog. 

4.5 Human-in-the-loop control 

src/enclawed/hitl.ts provides per-agent sessions with a state machine PENDING → RUNNING 

⇄ PAUSED → {STOPPED, COMPLETED, FAILED} , a real-time event stream on the controller (EventEmitter -based, with both a typed channel per event name and a generic event channel), and an approval queue. Each AgentSession exposes: 

• pause() , resume() , stop(reason) , complete() , fail(reason) — explicit operator con-trols. stop is final; the state machine forbids transitions out of any terminal state. 

• checkpoint() — a cooperative cancellation point the agent code awaits between actions. It throws AgentStoppedError if the session has been stopped, and blocks until resume() 

if the session is paused. We chose cooperative over preemptive cancellation deliberately: Saltzer and Schroeder’s complete mediation principle [41] argues for explicit checkpoints over forced thread termination, which in a single-threaded async runtime can leave shared state in an inconsistent half-mutated form. 

• proposeAction(actionType, payload) — if the action type belongs to the session’s approval-required set, the call awaits a human decision (allow / deny) routed through the controller’s approval queue. Deny raises ApprovalDeniedError ; if the agent is stopped while the call is awaiting the human, it instead raises AgentStoppedError (the approval is no longer relevant). The HitlController maintains the session registry, the approval queue, and a stopAll(reason) 

mass-halt operation. Every state transition and every approval request/resolution is emitted as an event and (when an AuditLogger is wired) appended to the hash-chained audit log under the hitl. ⟨type ⟩ namespace. A separate operator UI (CLI, web, or remote) subscribes to the event stream to render live status and to call resolveApproval(id, decision) when a human approves or denies a queued action. Sub-second latency is the design goal; the controller does no I/O on the hot path. 12 4.6 Secure transaction buffer with rollback 

The framework treats every reversible action an agent takes as a transaction , in the sense of Gray’s classical formulation [42]. The deploying organization registers each action’s inverse at the moment of execution; the buffer ( src/enclawed/transaction-buffer.ts ) holds the resulting transaction record so it can be rolled back later if a human, an automated guardrail, or a failed downstream operation demands undo. 

Memory-bounded rollback window. The buffer is sized as a configurable percentage of system RAM (default 50%, configurable via the ramPercent constructor option, with an ab-solute maxBytes override). The size cap matches the eviction policy of Clark-Wilson [37]’s well-formed transaction discipline applied to a finite resource: as long as the action sits in the buffer it can be inverted; once evicted, it has been implicitly committed. A new record that would push the buffer past the cap auto-commits the oldest records FIFO until enough room is freed. 

Tamper-evident chain. Each transaction is hash-chained to its predecessor with SHA-256, in the same shape as the audit log of §4.1. verifyChain() performs an independent walk so an operator (or a separate auditor process) can detect silent tampering of the in-memory record set. Every record, rollback, commit, and eviction is emitted to the audit log when one is wired. 

Rollback semantics. rollback(n) pops the n most recent records and runs each inverse 

in LIFO order. An inverse that throws is reported in the result’s errors array and an audit 

transaction.rollback-failed record is appended, but rollback continues so a single broken inverse cannot block restoration of the rest of the window. After rollback the chain is re-anchored to the new tail so subsequent records continue cleanly. 

4.7 Zero-trust blockchained key broker 

The deployments enclawed targets prefer full enclave isolation, but some are not free to choose: a healthcare system may be required to escrow keys in a regulator-approved managed Key Management Service (KMS); a defense contractor may operate at CMMC Level 2 [4] with a FedRAMP cloud KMS; a financial-services firm may use multiple cloud hardware security modules (HSMs) across regions for availability. In these settings the key custodian sits outside the host’s trust boundary — the broker must work without trusting any single provider. 

src/enclawed/zero-trust-key-broker.ts implements a host-side broker that: 

• Treats every KeyProvider as untrusted. Each response is a providerId -pinned, Ed25519-signed Attestation carrying (keyId, ts, keyHash, payload, nonce) ; an unsigned, malformed, replayed ( keyId mismatch), cross-claimed ( providerId mismatch), or self-inconsistent ( keyHash ̸ = SHA-256(payload) ) attestation is excluded from the quorum count. 

• Requires a configurable K-of-N quorum of valid agreeing attestations before it returns any key material to the host. 

• Records every operation — success and quorum-not-met failures — in a hash-chained, broker-signed ledger ( KeyChainLedger ). The ledger is the “blockchain”: single-writer, append-only, with each block containing the operation, the ordered list of providers queried, fingerprints of every attestation considered, the SHA-256 of the derived key bytes, the previous block’s hash, and an Ed25519 broker signature. verifyChain(brokerPublicKeyPem) 

performs an independent walk so any external auditor with the broker’s public key plus the providers’ public keys can validate the entire history without trusting the broker either. 13 • Supports two operating modes: 1. Consensus mode — each provider returns the same wrapped key blob (e.g. they all decrypt the same envelope from a shared root). The broker groups attestations by their declared keyHash and accepts the largest group that reaches quorum. Adishonest provider returning a different value is excluded silently from the winning group. 2. Threshold-XOR mode — each provider returns one XOR share of the key. The broker requires all N shares (degenerate K=N quorum) and reconstructs the master key by XOR. No single provider ever holds the full key; collusion of N −1 providers is insufficient. The architecture deliberately mirrors the audit log of §4.1 and the transaction buffer of §4.6: the same hash-chain primitive [12, 14] is reused at three layers (audit, rollback, key operations), so an external auditor only needs to learn one verification routine. 

Limitations. Threshold-XOR is N-of-N, not K-of-N. A future Shamir secret-sharing [53] backend can supply true K-of-N confidentiality of the master key while preserving the same 

KeyProvider interface; the broker is structured to accept additional combiners. Like the au-dit log, the ledger detects in-place tamper but not tail truncation, so production deployments must replicate it to a separate auditor in real time. Provider-side key storage is the provider’s problem; the broker only verifies what each provider says it returned. Byzantine-fault analysis of the quorum threshold follows the classical bounds of Lamport-Shostak-Pease [54] (with f

Byzantine providers, the broker needs K ≥ f + 1 valid attestations to ensure at least one honest provider is in the winning group). Concretely: at N = 5 providers, K = 3 tolerates one Byzan-tine provider; at N = 7 , K = 4 tolerates two; the deploying organization picks the K/N pair that matches its threat model. NIST SP 800-152 [55] is a useful reference for the operational constraints on managed key custodians. 

# 5 Module Signing and Trust Root 

Each module ships an enclawed.module.json alongside its package.json :

{ "v": 1, "id": "mcp-attested", "publisher": "enclawed reference", "version": "0.1.0", "clearance": "restricted-plus", "capabilities": ["mcp-client", "tool"], "signerKeyId": "enclawed-attested-reference-2026", "signature": "<base64 Ed25519 signature>" } 

The signature is an Ed25519 [13] signature over a stable canonical encoding of the manifest body excluding signature itself, so signing is idempotent. The trust root binds each public key to a list of clearance tiers it is approved to attest. Verification passes when (i) the manifest’s 

signerKeyId resolves to a signer in the trust root, (ii) the signer is approved for the mani-fest’s declared clearance, (iii) the signature verifies against the canonical bytes, and (iv) any caller-required clearance is met. In the enclaved flavor, the bootstrap calls lockTrustRoot() 

after the deploying organization’s signers are loaded, after which any setTrustRoot() or 

resetTrustRoot() call throws TrustRootLockedError .The module loader is two-staged: preloadModuleDecisions(rootDir) walks the modules directory once at boot, parses every manifest, runs checkModule() against the active flavor and 14 Rank default us-government healthcare-hipaa financial-services 3-tier                               

> 0PUBLIC UNCLASSIFIED PUBLIC PUBLIC PUBLIC 1INTERNAL CUI INTERNAL INTERNAL INTERNAL 2CONFIDENTIAL CONFIDENTIAL PHI CONFIDENTIAL RESTRICTED 3RESTRICTED SECRET SENSITIVE-PHI MNPI —4RESTRICTED-PLUS TOP SECRET RESEARCH-EMB. PRIVILEGED-COUNSEL —5SCI TOP SECRET//SCI ———

Table 6: Built-in classification schemes (column headers are scheme ids; rank-4 of 

healthcare-hipaa is RESEARCH-EMBARGOED, abbreviated for table fit). Aliases such as 

q-cleared ≡ rank 4 of us-government are accepted by parse() and by manifest clearance 

validation. trust root, and stashes the per-id decisions on the runtime singleton; the synchronous validation chokepoints (channel- and provider-validation, both patched into upstream OpenClaw) read the cached decisions without performing async I/O on a hot path. Modules denied at preload are rejected when their channels or providers subsequently try to register, with a corresponding 

module.deny.channel or module.deny.provider audit record. 

# 6 Configurable Classification — Worked Examples 

Table 6 shows the five built-in schemes side by side. A deploying organization selects a scheme via: 

ENCLAWED_FLAVOR=enclaved \ ENCLAWED_CLASSIFICATION_SCHEME=healthcare-hipaa \ ENCLAWED_AUDIT_PATH=/var/log/enclawed/audit.jsonl \ node openclaw.mjs gateway run --bind loopback 

For a custom scheme, the same env var is set to a JSON file path; loadSchemeByName 

accepts an optional allowedDirs parameter that rejects paths outside a vetted configuration directory. 

# 7 Attested MCP Module 

mcp-attested is a reference Model Context Protocol [15] client that gates every connection on a remote peer’s signed clearance attestation. The remote server publishes a JSON document at /.well-known/ with the same shape as enclawed.module.json ; the client fetches it, runs it through checkModule() with the caller’s required clearance, and proceeds only on success. The capability mcp-server must be declared. A typical refusal sequence: 

const c = new QClearedMcpClient({ requiredClearance: "restricted-plus", }); const r = await c.connect("https://mcp-internal.acme.lan:8443/"); // In enclaved flavor: // { ok: false, reason: "signer not approved..." } // In open flavor: // { ok: false, reason: "...(open flavor: warn-only)" } 

The client is sector-neutral: requiredClearance can be any name in the active scheme, so a healthcare deployment can require sensitive-phi and a U.S.-government deployment can require q-cleared using the same code path. 15 8 Prompt Injection Defenses 

src/enclawed/prompt-shield.ts provides defensive helpers for text that flows from untrusted sources (channel input, retrieved document, tool output) into a model prompt. The framework does not promise complete prompt-injection defense — that is an open research problem [20, 21, 22] — but it neutralizes the most common silent-confusion vectors so they surface as visible content rather than control signals to the model. 

sanitizeForPrompt(text) performs five operations in order: 1. stripControlChars replaces ASCII C0 control characters (the byte range 0x00–0x1F excluding TAB) with the Unicode replacement character U+FFFD. 2. stripBidi removes the Unicode bidirectional-override range U+202A–U+202E and U+2066– U+2069. 3. stripZeroWidth removes the zero-width characters U+200B–U+200D, U+2060, and U+FEFF. 4. neutralizeRoleBoundaries prefixes any line starting with system: / assistant: /

user: / tool: / function: (with optional leading whitespace or Markdown emphasis) with a literal [USER-CONTENT] marker so the model sees them as quoted rather than as a fresh role boundary. 5. neutralizeFences inserts a zero-width character before any line consisting of triple back-ticks so the closing fence cannot break out of a quoted code block the host wraps untrusted input in. 

detectInjection(text) returns finding identifiers without modifying the text, including a heuristic for ALL-CAPS imperative override phrases (“IGNORE ALL PREVIOUS INSTRUC-TIONS”, “OVERRIDE the above messages”, etc.). 

# 9 Evaluation 

9.1 Test methodology 

The framework ships with two test surfaces. The canonical .mjs suite uses Node’s built-in 

node:test runner [24] and depends only on node:crypto , allowing verification without any 

npm install . A vitest twin under src/enclawed/integration.test.ts exercises the same surface in the upstream OpenClaw pnpm test pipeline. 

9.2 Unit test coverage 

Table 7 enumerates the per-module unit-test counts. All 146 unit tests pass on Node 22. 

9.3 Adversarial pen-test coverage 

Table 8 enumerates the per-file pen-test counts. All 58 pen-tests pass on Node 22. 

9.4 Bugs found and fixed during construction 

The unit and pen suites caught the following real defects during development; each was fixed prior to publication: 1. crypto-fips.deriveKey — ERR_CRYPTO_INVALID_SCRYPT_PARAMS at boundary. Lifted 

maxmem explicitly to 64 MiB. 16 Module Tests Coverage focus 

classification.test.mjs 13 lattice arithmetic, format/parse round-trip, immutability 

classification-scheme.test.mjs 11 all 5 presets round-trip, custom JSON, validation invariants 

dlp-scanner.test.mjs 11 all 3 pattern families, redact correctness 

policy.test.mjs 9 enclaved/open defaults, allowlist en-forcement, frozen 

module-loader.test.mjs 8 8 deny paths and 1 allow path under both flavors 

crypto-fips.test.mjs 7 AES-GCM round-trip, AAD binding, FIPS gate 

zeroize.test.mjs 7 buffer fill, withSecret on success and throw 

egress-guard.test.mjs 6 block, allow, lifecycle 

module-manifest.test.mjs 6 valid parse, invariant rejection, hash stability 

flavor.test.mjs 5 alias parsing, env override, default 

audit-log.test.mjs 4 append + verify, tamper, reopen, hash determinism 

module-signing.test.mjs 4 Ed25519 round-trip, wrong-key, tam-pered, malformed 

hitl.test.mjs 14 state machine, cooperative checkpoint, pause/resume/stop, approval queue, audit integration 

transaction-buffer.test.mjs 18 ramPercent sizing, hash chain, LIFO rollback, partial-failure rollback, evic-tion, audit integration 

zero-trust-key-broker.test.mjs 19 attestation sign/verify, quorum success and failure, signature forgery exclusion, providerId / keyId / payload-hash mis-match exclusion, threshold-XOR recon-struction, ledger verifyChain (clean / tampered / wrong key), audit integra-tion 

mcp-attested/test/server-clearance.test.mjs 4 generic and US-gov vocab, deny-on-low, open warn-only 

Total unit + module 146 

Table 7: Unit test inventory. 2. classification.makeLabel — compartments backed by Set were mutable through .add() 

despite Object.freeze . Switched to deduplicated, sorted, frozen arrays. 3. classification.parse — auto-promoting TOP_SECRET to TOP_SECRET_SCI on any non-releasability segment broke format /parse round-tripping. Removed; SCI is a separately representable head. 4. audit-log.append — concurrent calls raced on lastHash , producing a broken chain. Fixed with internal Promise queue. 5. audit-log log-injection — payload strings containing raw newlines could spoof a fake JSONL record. Fixed with deepSanitize pass before record construction. 6. trust-root — post-boot setTrustRoot could substitute attacker-controlled signers. Fixed with lockTrustRoot() called by the bootstrap in enclaved .17 File Tests Adversarial focus 

audit-log.pentest.mjs 6 in-place edit, tail truncation (documented limit), record reorder, newline log-injection, 

__proto__ pollution, 100 concurrent appends 

signature-forgery.pentest.mjs 7 wrong-key, signerKeyId swap, signature re-play across modules, downgrade attack, ca-pability injection, malformed signature, open-flavor warning capture 

egress-bypass.pentest.mjs 8 hostname case normalization, Host-header spoofing, embedded credentials, IPv4-in-IPv6, file:/data: schemes, fetch reassign with/without freeze (latter via subprocess), malformed URLs 

trust-root-and-scheme.pentest.mjs 10 setTrustRoot after lock, 

__proto__ /constructor pollution, dupli-cate normalized names, non-contiguous ranks, negative rank, empty levels, non-string canonicalName, missing id, type checks 

dlp-evasion.pentest.mjs 8 oversize cap, ReDoS bound, zero-width cam-ouflage, whitespace variants, redact correct-ness, PEM camouflage gap, null/undefined safety 

prompt-injection.pentest.mjs 11 5 spoofed roles, bidi overrides, zero-width camouflage, control chars, code-fence break-out, imperative-override phrases, multi-vector composite, idempotency 

code-injection.pentest.mjs 8 shell-metachar manifest fields, JS-eval clear-ance rejected, function-shaped JSON treated as data, channel id path-traversal denied, 

__proto__ provider id, allowedDirs allowlist, malformed JSON error context, deep-JSON safety 

Total pen-tests 58 

Table 8: Adversarial test inventory. Each row covers a distinct attack family; cases that doc-ument a known limitation are noted as “documented” or “gap” so the deploying organization knows where defense-in-depth is required. 7. dlp-scanner — unbounded input could trigger pathological regex CPU. Added 1 MiB cap with throw or truncate. 8. egress-guard — globalThis.fetch reassignment could bypass the guard. Added freeze:true ,which sets the property via Object.defineProperty with writable:false and configurable:false .9. Scheme parser — accepted a non-string canonicalName via String(...) coercion. Now requires a real string with TypeError. 10. Scheme loader — unwrapped JSON.parse surfaced a bare SyntaxError . Wrapped with file-path context; added allowedDirs path-traversal allowlist. 

9.5 Aggregate result 

All 204 tests (146 unit + 58 pen) pass on Node 22 in approximately 0.4 seconds. All 22 framework TypeScript files type-check clean under tsc –strict –noEmit . The continuous-integration (CI) workflow at .github/workflows/enclawed-security.yml runs both suites on push, pull request (PR), and weekly cron, plus a strict-mode typecheck and a boot-time signature verification of every shipped module manifest. 18 10 Related Work 

Multi-channel AI assistants. OpenClaw [25] is the upstream personal-AI gateway from which enclawed is forked. LiteLLM [19] provides a multi-provider proxy but does not address classification or attestation. Local-inference engines such as Ollama [18], vLLM [16], LM Studio [19], and SGLang [17] are the inference targets that survive the deletion catalog of Section 3.2. 

Information-flow control. The Bell-LaPadula model [10] originated the no-read-up / no-write-down formulation enclawed implements. Operating-system mandatory-access-control (MAC) implementations such as SELinux [11] are the kernel-layer counterpart that enclawed assumes the deploying organization will configure separately. 

Prompt-injection research. Greshake et al. [20] formalized indirect prompt injection; Perez and Ribeiro [21] catalogued early attack patterns; Schulhoff et al. [22] demonstrated competition-grade jailbreaks. enclawed’s prompt-shield module addresses the data-sanitization layer of this problem only; the broader research direction remains open. 

Attested peer trust. Transport Layer Security (TLS) client certificates and the Secure Pro-duction Identity Framework for Everyone (SPIFFE) and its SPIRE runtime [23] solve identity attestation in service meshes. enclawed’s mcp-attested module borrows the same shape (signed manifest plus trust root) but applies it specifically to the Model Context Protocol [15] where peer attestation is not yet standardized. 

Audit logs. Tamper-evident logging via hash chains is a classical technique [12, 14]. enclawed implements a single-machine variant; production deployments should layer WORM storage or off-host shipping (e.g. to a separate audit aggregator) on top. 

# 11 Limitations and Gaps the Deploying Organization Owns 

The framework cannot, by itself, deliver an accredited deployment. The following gaps are explicitly out of scope and must be filled by the deploying organization’s security and compliance program: 

• Identity binding. canRead enforces Bell-LaPadula, but no identity layer ships. Integrate the organization’s identity provider (IdP) — using SAML, OIDC, or a smart card — and bind a clearance label to every session. 

• OS-level mandatory access control. Defense in depth requires SELinux MLS or equivalent enforcing the same lattice outside the JavaScript process. 

• Cross-trust-zone transfer. The framework forbids egress; a real deployment needs an accredited cross-zone control (a data diode, a file-transfer appliance, a manual review queue, or a vendor CDS). 

• Validated cryptographic module. The deployment must link against a regime-appropriate validated module (FIPS 140-3 for U.S. federal / DoD / DoE / FedRAMP; Common Criteria (CC) Evaluation Assurance Level (EAL) evaluations for some EU and Asia-Pacific (APAC) regimes). 

• Key management. Replace passphrase parameters with HSM-backed key references (Public-Key Cryptography Standards #11 (PKCS#11), the Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP), or the vendor’s software development kit (SDK)). 19 • At-rest coverage. Wrap every persistent artifact — credentials, sessions, model weights, swap, core dumps — not just the credential planner. 

• Audit log durability. Ship records to WORM media or an isolated audit aggregator; the on-disk hash chain alone cannot detect trailing truncation. 

• Memory hygiene. JavaScript strings cannot be zeroized; audit every secret-handling path. Disable swap and core dumps. 

• Plugin allowlist by signature, not id. Bind each allowed plugin to a signed manifest hash and reject any drift. 

• Cascade work after module deletion. The 78 deleted module directories leave dangling ref-erences in upstream code (legacy migrations, doctor repair paths, hard-coded fallbacks). The deploying organization must run pnpm tsgo && pnpm test && pnpm build to enu-merate and fix them. 

# 12 Conclusion 

enclawed packages a coherent set of hardening primitives — classification labels, deny-by-default policy, egress allowlist, hash-chained audit, DLP scanning, FIPS-gated at-rest crypto, secret zeroization, Ed25519 module signing with a clearance-aware trust root, and prompt-injection sanitization — behind a single one-call bootstrap that runs before any plugin loads. The two-flavor design preserves upstream compatibility for community deployments while supporting strict enforcement in regulated settings. The classification ladder is data-driven, accommodating any sector’s vocabulary through five built-in presets or a custom JSON scheme. The 204-test suite (146 unit + 58 adversarial) and the CI workflow let a deploying organization continuously verify that the security primitives still hold against the attack patterns enumerated in Section 9. The framework is not a substitute for accredited cryptography, hardware, facilities, or as-sessor sign-off; the gaps in Section 11 remain the deploying organization’s responsibility. What enclawed provides is an explicit, well-tested, and continuously-verifiable scaffold that the orga-nization’s compliance program can build on rather than reinvent. 

# Availability and Licensing 

The project is split into two independent git repositories with different licenses, hosting visibili-ties, and CI pipelines. The closed repository consumes the open repository as a git submodule. 

Open core ( enclawed-oss , public repository): The framework primitives — 22 Type-Script files plus the parallel .mjs reference, the unit and adversarial pen-test suites, the up-stream OpenClaw fork base, the open / local-capable extensions (Ollama, vLLM, LM Studio, etc.), this paper, and the OSS-tree CI workflow — are released under the MIT License and hosted at https://github.com/metereconsulting/enclawed [56]. Copyright (c) 2026 Metere Consulting, LLC.; copyright (c) 2025 Peter Steinberger (upstream OpenClaw). MIT permits commercial use, modification, redistribution, and incorporation into proprietary projects, sub-ject only to preservation of the copyright notice and license text. To clone: 

git clone https://github.com/metereconsulting/enclawed 

Closed extensions ( enclawed-enclaved , private repository): The zero-trust blockchained key broker (§4.7), the bundled mcp-attested reference module (§7), and the reference classified-profile config are released under a proprietary, all-rights-reserved license . Copyright (c) 2026 Metere Consulting, LLC. Use, modification, redistribution, or preparation of derivative 20 works requires a separate written license agreement; see LICENSE in the closed repository and the contact information in its NOTICE.md .The closed repository enclawed-enclaved consumes enclawed-oss as a git submodule (recorded in .gitmodules , pinned to a specific OSS commit). The submodule is initialized with git clone –recurse-submodules or git submodule update –init –recursive . After initialisation the OSS tree appears at enclawed-oss/ inside the closed repository, and closed-tree imports resolve into it via relative paths. The submodule retains its own MIT LICENSE 

and NOTICE.md inside the closed repository tree; the proprietary license of the closed repository does not extend to anything inside the submodule, and the MIT terms of the submodule do not extend to anything outside it (MIT does not impose copyleft on dependents). Removing the entire closed repository leaves the OSS repository fully buildable, testable, and publishable. A top-level LICENSE.md at the development workspace root (alongside both repository check-outs) summarizes the two-license posture, lists the conditions under which the arrangement is legally well-formed (copyright ownership of the closed tree, no copyleft contamination, contrib-utor agreements for the OSS tree, trademark search, patent and export-control review), and explicitly disclaims that the licensing files were prepared without attorney review. The publisher (Metere Consulting, LLC.) is solely responsible for obtaining qualified IP-counsel verification before relying on this posture in production. 

# References 

[1] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Security and Privacy Controls for Infor-mation Systems and Organizations , NIST Special Publication 800-53 Rev. 5, 2020. [2] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules , FIPS 140-3, 2019. [3] National Institute of Standards and Technology. The NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 2.0 , NIST CSWP 29, 2024. [4] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Protecting Controlled Unclassified Infor-mation in Nonfederal Systems and Organizations , NIST SP 800-171 Rev. 2, 2020. [5] International Organization for Standardization. ISO/IEC 27001:2022 — Information se-curity, cybersecurity and privacy protection — Information security management systems — Requirements , 2022. [6] American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy , 2022. [7] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (Gen-eral Data Protection Regulation) , 2016. [8] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. HIPAA Security Rule, 45 CFR Part 160 and Subparts A and C of Part 164 .[9] PCI Security Standards Council. Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard, v4.0 ,2022. [10] D. E. Bell and L. J. LaPadula. Secure Computer System: Unified Exposition and Multics Interpretation , MITRE Technical Report MTR-2997, 1976. [11] P. Loscocco and S. Smalley. Integrating Flexible Support for Security Policies into the Linux Operating System. In Proceedings of the FREENIX Track: 2001 USENIX Annual Technical Conference , 2001. 21 [12] S. Haber and W. S. Stornetta. How to Time-Stamp a Digital Document. Journal of Cryp-tology , 3(2), 1991. [13] S. Josefsson and I. Liusvaara. Edwards-Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (EdDSA) , IETF RFC 8032, 2017. [14] S. A. Crosby and D. S. Wallach. Efficient Data Structures for Tamper-Evident Logging. In 

18th USENIX Security Symposium , 2009. [15] Anthropic. Model Context Protocol Specification , 2024. https://modelcontextprotocol. io/ .[16] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. Gonzalez, H. Zhang, and I. Stoica. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAt-tention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) ,2023. [17] L. Zheng et al. SGLang: Efficient Execution of Structured Language Model Programs .arXiv:2312.07104, 2023. [18] Ollama. https://github.com/ollama/ollama .[19] LM Studio. https://lmstudio.ai/ .[20] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz. Not What You’ve Signed Up For: Compromising Real-World LLM-Integrated Applications with Indirect Prompt Injection. In 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security (AISec) ,2023. [21] F. Perez and I. Ribeiro. Ignore Previous Prompt: Attack Techniques For Language Models. arXiv:2211.09527, 2022. [22] S. Schulhoff et al. Ignore This Title and HackAPrompt: Exposing Systemic Vulnerabilities of LLMs through a Global Scale Prompt Hacking Competition. In Proceedings of EMNLP ,2023. [23] SPIFFE: Secure Production Identity Framework for Everyone. https://spiffe.io/ .[24] Node.js Foundation. Node.js node:test module , 2024. https://nodejs.org/api/test. html .[25] OpenClaw upstream repository. https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw .[26] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0) , NIST AI 100-1, January 2023. [27] International Organization for Standardization. ISO/IEC 42001:2023 — Information tech-nology — Artificial intelligence — Management system , 2023. [28] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) , June 2024. [29] OWASP Foundation. OWASP Top 10 for Large Lan-guage Model Applications , 2025 edition. https://owasp.org/ www-project-top-10-for-large-language-model-applications/ .22 [30] The MITRE Corporation. Adversarial Threat Landscape for Artificial-Intelligence Systems (ATLAS) . https://atlas.mitre.org/ .[31] N. Carlini, F. Tramer, E. Wallace, M. Jagielski, A. Herbert-Voss, K. Lee, A. Roberts, T. Brown, D. Song, U. Erlingsson, A. Oprea, and C. Raffel. Extracting Training Data from Large Language Models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium , 2021. [32] M. Nasr, N. Carlini, J. Hayase, M. Jagielski, A. F. Cooper, D. Ippolito, C. A. Choquette-Choo, E. Wallace, F. Tramer, and K. Lee. Scalable Extraction of Training Data from (Production) Language Models . arXiv:2311.17035, 2023. [33] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Secure Software Development Framework (SSDF) Version 1.1 , NIST SP 800-218, February 2022. [34] Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, U.S. National Security Agency, and U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation. Engaging with Artificial Intelligence: Joint Guidance for Secure Deployment , 2024. [35] Civil Resolution Tribunal of British Columbia. Moffatt v. Air Canada , 2024 BCCRT 149, February 2024. [36] K. J. Biba. Integrity Considerations for Secure Computer Systems , MITRE Technical Re-port MTR-3153, 1977. [37] D. D. Clark and D. R. Wilson. A Comparison of Commercial and Military Computer Security Policies. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 1987. [38] D. F. C. Brewer and M. J. Nash. The Chinese Wall Security Policy. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 1989. [39] R. S. Sandhu, E. J. Coyne, H. L. Feinstein, and C. E. Youman. Role-Based Access Control Models. IEEE Computer , 29(2):38–47, February 1996. [40] V. C. Hu, D. Ferraiolo, R. Kuhn, A. Schnitzer, K. Sandlin, R. Miller, and K. Scarfone. 

Guide to Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) Definition and Considerations , NIST Special Publication 800-162, January 2014. [41] J. H. Saltzer and M. D. Schroeder. The Protection of Information in Computer Systems. 

Proceedings of the IEEE , 63(9):1278–1308, September 1975. [42] J. Gray. The Transaction Concept: Virtues and Limitations. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB) , 1981. [43] D. Avila and contributors. LibreChat — enhanced ChatGPT clone with multi-provider, plugins, and agents. https://github.com/danny-avila/LibreChat .[44] Open WebUI Project. Open WebUI — user-friendly self-hosted AI interface (formerly ollama-webui). https://github.com/open-webui/open-webui .[45] Mintplex Labs. AnythingLLM — the all-in-one AI app for any LLM with full RAG and agent capabilities. https://github.com/Mintplex-Labs/anything-llm .[46] Jan.ai Project. Jan — bring AI to your desktop. Open-source ChatGPT alternative, runs 100% offline. https://github.com/janhq/jan .[47] LobeHub. Lobe Chat — open-source modern-design AI chat framework. https://github. com/lobehub/lobe-chat .23 [48] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, A. H. Awadallah, R. W. White, D. Burger, and C. Wang. AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Conversation. arXiv:2308.08155, 2023. [49] H. Chase and the LangChain community. LangChain — building applications with LLMs through composability. https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain .[50] T. Rebedea, R. Dinu, M. Sreedhar, C. Parisien, and J. Cohen. NeMo Guardrails: A Toolkit for Controllable and Safe LLM Applications with Programmable Rails. arXiv:2310.10501, 2023. [51] H. Inan, K. Upasani, J. Chi, R. Rungta, K. Iyer, Y. Mao, M. Tontchev, Q. Hu, B. Fuller, D. Testuggine, and M. Khabsa. Llama Guard: LLM-based Input-Output Safeguard for Human-AI Conversations. arXiv:2312.06674, 2023. [52] Lakera AI. Lakera Guard — protect your LLM applications from prompt injection, PII leaks, and data poisoning. https://www.lakera.ai/lakera-guard .[53] A. Shamir. How to Share a Secret. Communications of the ACM , 22(11):612–613, November 1979. [54] L. Lamport, R. Shostak, and M. Pease. The Byzantine Generals Problem. ACM Transac-tions on Programming Languages and Systems , 4(3):382–401, July 1982. [55] National Institute of Standards and Technology. A Profile for U.S. Federal Cryptographic Key Management Systems , NIST Special Publication 800-152, October 2015. [56] A. Metere (Metere Consulting, LLC.). enclawed — open-source half . Public repository. 

https://github.com/metereconsulting/enclawed .24