Title: Parallax: Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12986v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:39:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

# A Paradigm for Architecturally Safe Autonomous Execution 

# Joel Fokou 

Independent Researcher 

# Abstract 

Autonomous AI agents are rapidly transitioning from experimental tools to operational infrastructure, with projections that 80% of enterprise applications will embed AI copilots by the end of 2026. As agents gain the ability to execute real-world actions (reading files, running commands, making network requests, modifying databases), a fundamental security gap has emerged. The domi-nant approach to agent safety relies on prompt-level guardrails: natural language instructions that operate at the same abstraction level as the threats they attempt to mitigate. This paper argues that prompt-based safety is architecturally insufficient for agents with execution capability and introduces Parallax , a paradigm for safe autonomous AI execution grounded in four principles: Cognitive-Executive Separation , which structurally prevents the reasoning system from executing actions; Adversarial Validation with Gradu-ated Determinism , which interposes an independent, multi-tiered validator between reasoning and execution; Information Flow Con-trol , which propagates data sensitivity labels through agent work-flows to detect context-dependent threats; and Reversible Execution ,which captures pre-destructive state to enable rollback when vali-dation fails. We present OpenParallax , an open-source reference implementation in Go, and evaluate it using Assume-Compromise Evaluation , a methodology that bypasses the reasoning system entirely to test the architectural boundary under full agent com-promise. Across 280 adversarial test cases in nine attack categories, 

Parallax blocks 98.9% of attacks with zero false positives under its default configuration, and 100% of attacks under its maximum-security configuration. When the reasoning system is compromised, prompt-level guardrails provide zero protection because they exist only within the compromised system; Parallax ’s architectural boundary holds regardless. 

# Keywords 

AI agent security, privilege separation, adversarial validation, au-tonomous execution, information flow control, agentic AI safety 

# 1 Introduction 

The rapid deployment of autonomous AI agents represents one of the most consequential shifts in computing since the transition from mainframes to networked systems. Industry projections in-dicate that by the end of 2026, 40% of enterprise applications will embed task-specific AI agents [ 1], while AI copilots are expected to appear in nearly 80% of enterprise workplace applications [ 2 ]. These systems are no longer confined to generating content or an-swering questions. They read files, execute shell commands, make API calls, query databases, modify configurations, and orchestrate multi-step workflows across production infrastructure. In the con-sumer domain, personal AI agents now operate on users’ machines with access to the local filesystem, credentials, and network inter-faces [3]. This transition from generative AI to agentic AI introduces a security problem that is categorically different from the risks ad-dressed by the large language model (LLM) safety literature to date. When an LLM is used as a conversational interface, the worst-case outcome of a safety failure is the generation of harmful or mislead-ing content. When that same LLM is embedded in an agent with execution privileges, a safety failure can result in data exfiltration, credential theft, system compromise, or irreversible destruction of critical resources. The distinction is not one of degree but of kind. The agent has agency : the capacity to act on the world. The security challenge is to ensure that this agency is exercised safely even when the reasoning system is compromised. 

# 1.1 The Prompt Guardrail Fallacy 

The dominant approach to AI agent safety is what we term prompt-level guardrailing : the practice of embedding safety instructions in the agent’s system prompt, instructing the model to refuse danger-ous requests, avoid certain actions, and comply with usage policies. This approach has three fundamental weaknesses. First, prompt guardrails share the same computational substrate as the threats they attempt to mitigate. The model processes safety instructions and adversarial inputs through the same attention mechanism, with no architectural distinction between trusted in-structions and untrusted data. This is precisely the condition that makes prompt injection possible [ 4]. As OpenAI has acknowledged, language models have no reliable mechanism for distinguishing between instructions and data [ 6], and NIST has classified agent hi-jacking through indirect prompt injection as a core threat to agentic systems [ 7]. Documented prompt injection attempts against enter-prise AI systems increased 340% year-over-year in late 2025 [ 8], with indirect attacks now accounting for over 55% of observed incidents and achieving 20–30% higher success rates than direct injection [9]. Second, prompt guardrails degrade under extended context. Re-search published in late 2025 and early 2026 has demonstrated that agents with long conversation histories are significantly more vul-nerable to manipulation, as cumulative context can shift the model’s effective constraint boundary through gradual “salami slicing” at-tacks [ 10 ]. Memory poisoning attacks can implant false instructions that persist across sessions, effectively converting the agent into a latent threat [11]. Third, prompt guardrails cannot survive multi-agent propaga-tion. In multi-agent systems where the output of one model becomes the input of another, a successful injection at one layer propagates through every subsequent layer [ 12 ]. Security testing shows that during a single prompt injection incident, attacks propagate to 48% of co-running agents in multi-agent deployments [ 9]. Cross-agent 

> arXiv:2604.12986v1 [cs.CR] 14 Apr 2026 Joel Fokou

trust exploitation, where one compromised agent manipulates an-other by exploiting implicit trust in inter-agent communication, has been demonstrated in production coding environments [13]. These are not theoretical concerns. In early 2026, the widely de-ployed open-source agent framework OpenClaw, with over 340,000 GitHub stars, was found to have multiple critical vulnerabilities in-cluding supply chain attacks exploiting the absence of privilege sep-aration between reasoning and execution, resulting in over 21,000 exposed instances [ 14 ]. A Fortune 500 company suffered data ex-filtration when a single malicious sentence embedded in a vendor invoice caused its internal AI assistant to forward its client data-base to an external server [ 15 ]. These incidents demonstrate that the threat model addressed by this work is not hypothetical but operational. 

# 1.2 The Architectural Insight 

The central argument of this paper is that agent safety cannot be achieved through any mechanism that operates at the language level :whether prompt engineering, output filtering, constitutional AI, or reinforcement learning from human feedback. These approaches improve the quality of the model’s judgments but do not constrain its actions . They are analogous to asking a user to follow a security policy without enforcing it at the operating system level: effective against accidental misuse, ineffective against motivated adversaries or systematic failure. We propose instead that agent safety requires architectural en-forcement : structural properties of the system that hold regardless of the state of the reasoning component. This insight draws on decades of established practice in systems security: 

• Privilege separation in operating systems ensures that a compromised user-space process cannot directly access kernel resources [ 16 ]. The security boundary exists at the hardware and OS level, not in the process’s own code. 

• Mandatory access control systems like Bell-LaPadula enforce information flow policies that no user-level action can override [17]. The policy is structural, not advisory. 

• Hardware security modules (HSMs) and Trusted Plat-form Modules (TPMs) provide trust anchors that the soft-ware they protect cannot modify or inspect [ 18 ]. The val-idator is immutable with respect to the validated. 

Parallax applies these principles to AI agent architecture. Its core insight can be stated simply: the system that reasons about actions must be structurally unable to execute them, and the system that executes actions must be structurally unable to reason about them, with an independent, immutable validator interposed between the two. 

# 1.3 Contributions 

This paper makes the following contributions: (1) The Parallax paradigm. We introduce a paradigm for architecturally safe autonomous AI execution comprising four principles (Cognitive-Executive Separation, Adversar-ial Validation with Graduated Determinism, Information Flow Control, and Reversible Execution) that are formally defined, grounded in established systems security theory, and independent of the specific AI architecture used for reasoning (Section 4). (2) A formal threat model for autonomous AI agents that en-compasses direct and indirect prompt injection, multi-step context manipulation, tool-use chain attacks, encoding and obfuscation exploits, multi-agent compromise and privilege escalation, and attacks targeting the validation layer itself (Section 3). (3) OpenParallax , an open-source reference implementa-tion in Go that realizes the Parallax paradigm through process-isolated architecture, a four-tiered validation sys-tem ( Shield ), information flow control tagging, pre-de-structive state capture ( Chronicle ), and sandbox integrity verification (Section 5). (4) Assume-Compromise Evaluation , a methodology for testing agent security architectures by bypassing the rea-soning system entirely and injecting tool calls directly into the execution boundary. Applied to 280 adversarial test cases across nine attack categories, demonstrating a 98.9% block rate with zero false positives under the default con-figuration, and 100% under the maximum-security configu-ration (Section 6). The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on AI agent security and the systems security foundations that inform Parallax . Section 3 defines the threat model. Section 4 presents the four principles of Parallax and their derived security properties. Section 5 describes the OpenParallax 

reference implementation. Section 6 reports our empirical evalua-tion. Section 7 discusses implications and limitations. Section 8 po-sitions Parallax relative to existing approaches. Section 9 outlines future research directions, including purpose-trained evaluation models, embodied system applications, and critical infrastructure deployment. Section 10 concludes. 

# 2 Background and Motivation 

This section surveys the current state of AI agent security (Sec-tion 2.1) and the systems security principles that inform the Paral-lax paradigm (Section 2.2). 

# 2.1 The Agent Execution Security Gap 

The transition from conversational LLMs to agentic AI systems has introduced a class of security risks for which the existing safety literature is poorly equipped. The distinction is fundamental: a conversational LLM produces content ; an agentic system produces 

actions . The safety properties required for each are categorically different. 

2.1.1 From Generation to Execution 

LLM safety research has historically focused on the quality of model outputs: reducing harmful content generation, mitigating bias, improving factual accuracy, and aligning model behavior with human preferences [ 22 , 23 ]. These efforts address the question: “Is the model producing the right thing?” The agentic security question Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

is different: “Is the system doing the right thing?” Here, “doing” in-volves file operations, shell command execution, API calls, database modifications, and interactions with external services. This shift introduces what Willison [ 24 ] has termed the Lethal Trifecta : the simultaneous presence of (1) access to private data, (2) exposure to untrusted content, and (3) an exfiltration vector through external requests. When an agent possesses all three prop-erties (and most production agents do), it is structurally vulnerable to attack regardless of the quality of its safety training or prompt engineering. The OWASP Foundation has recognized this categorical shift by publishing two separate security frameworks. The OWASP Top 10 for LLM Applications [ 4 ] addresses vulnerabilities in language models themselves: prompt injection, data poisoning, sensitive information disclosure. The OWASP Top 10 for Agentic Applications [ 5], released in December 2025 with input from over 100 security researchers, addresses what happens when those models gain tools, memory, and autonomy. The agentic framework introduces the principle of 

least agency : that autonomy should be earned and bounded, not granted by default. It enumerates ten risk categories specific to autonomous systems, including Agent Goal Hijack (ASI01), Tool Misuse (ASI02), Identity and Privilege Abuse (ASI03), and Rogue Agents (ASI10) [5]. As Microsoft’s AI Red Team has noted in their analysis of the OWASP agentic framework, “a system can be ‘working as designed’ while still taking steps that a human would be unlikely to approve, because the boundaries were unclear, permissions were too broad, or tool use was not tightly governed” [ 25 ]. This observation captures the essence of the execution security gap: the threat is not always a model behaving incorrectly , but a model behaving correctly within bounds that are insufficiently constrained .

2.1.2 The Current Defense Landscape 

Existing defenses for agentic AI systems fall into four broad categories, none of which provides architectural safety guarantees: 

Prompt-level guardrails. The most widely deployed approach embeds safety instructions in the agent’s system prompt. As estab-lished in Section 1.1, these share the same computational substrate as the threats they mitigate and are vulnerable to direct injection, indirect injection through ingested content, and degradation under extended context. Security testing demonstrates that 40% of AI agent frameworks contain exploitable prompt injection flaws in tool-execution logic [9]. 

Constitutional AI and RLHF. Approaches such as Constitu-tional AI [ 23 ] and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [ 22 ] improve the model’s internal tendency to refuse harm-ful requests. These are valuable contributions to model safety but operate at the reasoning level, not the execution level. A model trained through RLHF may reliably refuse to generate harmful con-tent, but when that model is embedded in an agent, the refusal depends on the model correctly identifying the harmful intent be-hind an indirect injection. This is precisely the failure mode that prompt injection exploits. 

Output filtering and content moderation. Post-generation filters analyze model outputs for harmful content before delivery to the user. For agentic systems, the relevant “output” is often a tool call or command execution rather than text, and the harmfulness of an action depends on context ( e.g. deleting a temporary file ver-sus deleting a configuration file) rather than content classification alone. 

Tool-use restrictions and approval flows. Some frameworks implement per-tool access control, requiring human approval for specific operations. While useful, these approaches either require constant human oversight (which negates the value of autonomy) or define static policies that cannot adapt to the contextual judgment required for nuanced decisions. None of these approaches enforces a structural separation be-tween reasoning and execution. In each case, the safety mechanism operates at the same level of abstraction as the reasoning system, ei-ther within the model (RLHF, Constitutional AI), within the prompt (guardrails), or within the same process (output filtering, approval flows). Parallax addresses this gap by enforcing safety at the ar-chitectural level, through properties that hold regardless of the state of the reasoning component. 

# 2.2 Foundations in Systems Security 

The Parallax paradigm is not constructed from first principles unique to AI. It draws on well-established concepts from systems security that have been validated over decades of deployment in operating systems, network security, and cryptographic infrastruc-ture. We briefly review the foundational concepts that inform each principle. 

2.2.1 Privilege Separation 

The principle of privilege separation divides a program into components with different levels of trust and capability, communi-cating through defined interfaces. Provos, Friedl, and Honeyman formalized this approach in their seminal work on OpenSSH [ 16 ], demonstrating that splitting a program into a privileged moni-tor and an unprivileged slave process, communicating through a socket pair, ensures that exploitation of the unprivileged compo-nent cannot yield unauthorized access to privileged operations. This principle is now foundational to the design of security-critical software, including mail transfer agents (Postfix), web servers, and the OpenBSD operating system. In Parallax , cognitive-executive separation applies the same principle: the reasoning process (un-privileged) communicates with the execution engine (privileged) through a defined gRPC interface, and exploitation of the reasoning process cannot yield execution capability. 

2.2.2 Mandatory Access Control and Information Flow 

The Bell-LaPadula model [ 17 ] established the theoretical foun-dation for mandatory access control (MAC), formalizing the “no read up, no write down” property that prevents information flow from higher security classifications to lower ones. Subsequent work on Decentralized Information Flow Control (DIFC) [ 26 ] extended these concepts to practical systems where data carries labels that propagate through computation. In Parallax , Information Flow Control applies these concepts to AI agent data flows: data read by the agent carries provenance and sensitivity labels that propagate Joel Fokou 

through tool calls, enabling the validation layer to detect context-dependent threats such as credential exfiltration through multi-step tool chains. 

2.2.3 Defense in Depth and Graduated Trust 

Saltzer and Schroeder’s foundational work on protection in com-puter systems [ 19 ] articulated the principle of defense in depth :security should not depend on a single mechanism, and multiple independent layers should each provide protection against differ-ent failure modes. Parallax operationalizes this principle through tiered validation with graduated determinism: the most determin-istic mechanisms (hardcoded policy rules) handle the majority of decisions, with progressively less deterministic mechanisms (fixed classifiers, budget-limited LLM evaluation) reserved for cases that require greater contextual judgment. Each tier has a different attack surface, and an adversary must defeat all tiers simultaneously to execute a harmful action. 

2.2.4 Hardware Trust Anchors 

Hardware Security Modules (HSMs) and Trusted Platform Mod-ules (TPMs) [ 18 ] provide a security foundation that the software they protect cannot modify, inspect, or circumvent. The trust an-chor exists at a layer below the evaluated system, and its integrity is guaranteed by the hardware boundary rather than by any software policy. In Parallax , the validation layer ( Shield ) serves an analo-gous role as a software trust anchor : it runs in a separate process, its configuration is hardcoded in compiled code rather than stored in mutable files, and the reasoning system has no mechanism to read, modify, or interfere with it. Validator immutability is guaranteed by architectural separation, not by policy compliance. 

# 3 Threat Model 

This section defines the adversary model, trust boundaries, and attack classification against which Parallax is designed. We also explicitly state the scope of threats addressed and those that fall outside the paradigm’s defensive perimeter. 

# 3.1 Adversary Model and Trust Boundaries 

We consider a system in which an AI reasoning component (the 

agent ) proposes actions to be executed on a host environment. The agent has access to a set of tools (file operations, shell execution, network requests, database queries, and API calls) that enable it to interact with the environment. The system may operate in a single-agent or multi-agent configuration, where a primary agent can delegate tasks to child agents. We define three trust levels: 

Untrusted: The agent process. The LLM-powered reasoning system is treated as fully untrusted . This is the defining assumption of Parallax and represents its principal departure from existing approaches. We assume the agent may be compromised at any time through direct prompt injection, indirect prompt injection via ingested content, memory poisoning, context manipulation over extended conversations, or any mechanism that causes the model to propose actions that deviate from the user’s intent. The agent may attempt to read, modify, or disable the validation layer. It may attempt to exfiltrate data, escalate privileges, modify system configuration, or persist malicious instructions across sessions. We make no assumptions about the model’s safety training, alignment, or refusal capabilities; the paradigm must hold even if these are entirely compromised. 

Untrusted: Child agent processes. In multi-agent configura-tions, child agents spawned by the primary agent inherit the same untrusted status. A child agent may be compromised independently of the parent through the same vectors. Additionally, a compro-mised parent may attempt to craft delegated tasks that cause a child agent to execute harmful actions, and a compromised child may attempt privilege escalation through the orchestration layer. Child agents cannot spawn their own children, access the parent’s memory or context, or communicate with sibling agents except through the orchestrator. 

Trusted: The engine process. The execution engine, which hosts the validation layer ( Shield ), the tool executors, and the state capture system ( Chronicle ), is treated as trusted. Its code is compiled, immutable at runtime, and runs in a separate process from all agent processes. The validation layer’s policies and logic cannot be modified by any agent process. This trust assumption is analogous to the trust placed in an operating system kernel or a hardware security module: the security of the entire system depends on the integrity of this component, and its integrity is maintained through architectural isolation rather than behavioral guarantees. 

The adversary. We consider an adversary who can: 

• Inject arbitrary instructions into the agent’s context through direct user input or indirect injection via documents, web content, emails, API responses, or any data the agent in-gests. 

• Craft multi-step attack sequences that build context over time, gradually shifting the agent’s behavior through indi-vidually benign interactions that culminate in a harmful action. 

• Exploit inter-agent trust to propagate malicious instruc-tions from a compromised agent to other agents in a multi-agent deployment. 

• Poison the agent’s persistent memory to implant latent instructions that activate in future sessions. 

• Use encoding, obfuscation, and indirection to disguise the nature of proposed actions ( e.g. Base64-encoded commands, environment variable expansion, pipe chains where indi-vidual components appear benign). 

• Attempt to directly attack the validation layer by crafting actions designed to read, modify, exhaust, or bypass Shield .The adversary cannot : gain direct code execution on the host outside of the agent system, modify the compiled engine binary, or compromise the deployment pipeline that delivers the engine pro-cess. These are infrastructure-level threats addressed by standard operational security practices (binary signing, secure deployment pipelines, host-level access control) rather than by the agent secu-rity paradigm. 

# 3.2 Attack Classification 

We organize attacks into seven categories that span the full surface area of agentic AI threats. This taxonomy draws on the OWASP Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

Top 10 for Agentic Applications [ 5], the MITRE ATLAS frame-work [ 27 ], the comprehensive agent threat model proposed by Narajala and Anca [28], and documented real-world incidents. 

3.2.1 C1: Direct Prompt Injection 

The adversary provides explicit instructions through the user input channel that direct the agent to perform harmful actions. This ranges from blunt commands (“delete all files”) to semantically reframed requests (“help me free up disk space by removing every-thing in the home directory”). Direct injection targets the agent’s inability to distinguish adversarial instructions from legitimate user requests when the instructions are presented in natural language. 

Parallax defense: Shield evaluates the proposed action (the file deletion, the command execution), not the framing of the request. A harmful action is blocked regardless of how it was motivated. 

3.2.2 C2: Indirect Prompt Injection 

The adversary embeds malicious instructions in content that the agent ingests during normal operation (documents it summarizes, web pages it reads, API responses it processes, emails it triages). This is the dominant real-world attack vector, accounting for over 55% of observed prompt injection incidents in 2026 [ 9]. Indirect injection is particularly dangerous because the malicious instruc-tions arrive through trusted data channels and may be invisible to the user. Parallax defense: since the agent cannot execute any action without Shield validation, the origin of the instruction is irrelevant. Whether the agent proposes a harmful action because the user asked for it or because a hidden instruction in a PDF told it to, the action is evaluated identically. 

3.2.3 C3: Multi-Step Context Manipulation 

The adversary constructs a sequence of individually benign inter-actions that gradually shift the agent’s behavior. Palo Alto Networks Unit 42 has documented “salami slicing” attacks where cumulative context over dozens of interactions shifts the agent’s effective con-straint boundary [ 10 ]. Research demonstrates that agents with long conversation histories are significantly more vulnerable to this form of manipulation, and that a single compromised agent can poison 87% of downstream decision-making within four hours in multi-agent systems [ 29 ]. Parallax defense: Shield evaluates each action independently, with no carry-over of approval from previous actions. Conversational momentum in the agent’s reasoning does not influence the validation layer, because the validation layer has no access to the agent’s conversational state. 

3.2.4 C4: Tool-Use Chain Attacks 

The adversary exploits the agent’s ability to call multiple tools in sequence, where individual tool calls appear benign but the chain produces a harmful outcome. For example: reading a file containing credentials (benign), writing those credentials into a URL (benign in isolation), and executing a network request to that URL (data exfiltration). OWASP identifies tool misuse (ASI02) as one of the top three agentic risks, with 520 reported incidents in 2026 [ 5, 29 ]. 

Parallax defense: Information Flow Control (Section 4.3) assigns sensitivity labels to data at the point of origin. When the agent reads a credential file, the content is tagged. When it subsequently attempts to write tagged content to a network-accessible location, 

Shield detects the information flow violation regardless of how many intermediate steps separate the read from the write. 

3.2.5 C5: Encoding and Obfuscation 

The adversary uses encoding, string manipulation, or shell fea-tures to disguise harmful actions. This includes Base64-encoded commands decoded at execution time, hexadecimal-encoded file paths, Unicode homoglyphs that make dangerous paths resemble safe ones, environment variable expansion where the variable con-tains the malicious payload, and pipe chains where each segment is benign but the pipeline produces harmful output. Parallax de-fense: Shield ’s Tier 1 heuristic engine includes pattern-matching rules specifically designed for these obfuscation techniques, inspect-ing command content after expansion and decoding rather than evaluating the surface representation alone. 

3.2.6 C6: Multi-Agent Compromise 

In multi-agent configurations, the adversary targets child agents or exploits inter-agent communication to propagate attacks. Attack vectors include: a compromised parent crafting malicious delegated tasks; a compromised child attempting privilege escalation through the orchestrator; a compromised agent writing poisoned instruc-tions to configuration files consumed by other agents (documented in production environments where a hijacked GitHub Copilot wrote malicious instructions to Claude Code’s configuration files [ 30 ]); and cascading failures where one compromised agent’s output be-comes the input for others. Parallax defense: every child agent runs in an independently sandboxed process, communicates with the engine through the same Shield validation path as the primary agent, cannot spawn further children, and cannot access any other agent’s memory or context. There is no trust inheritance: a child agent’s actions are validated with the same rigor as the parent’s. 

3.2.7 C7: Validator-Targeted Attacks 

The adversary specifically attempts to defeat the Parallax ar-chitecture itself. This includes: attempting to read Shield ’s policy files or configuration; attempting to modify Shield ’s Tier 0 rules or Tier 1 classifier; attempting to exhaust Shield ’s Tier 2 LLM evalua-tion budget through a flood of requests that trigger low-confidence classifier signals or match Tier 2 policy rules, then submitting a harmful action when only Tiers 0 and 1 are available; crafting ac-tions designed to appear benign to the classifier but produce harm-ful side effects; and exploiting potential race conditions through rapid sequential requests. Parallax defense: Validator Immutabil-ity (Section 4.5) ensures that the agent process has no mechanism to read, write, or interfere with Shield . Budget exhaustion attacks are mitigated by the design of Graduated Determinism: Tiers 0 and 1 together provide comprehensive coverage for well-characterized threats without any LLM dependency, and Tier 2 is reserved for policy-designated evaluations and low-confidence classifier signals. The system is designed to remain safe, not merely degraded, when operating on Tiers 0 and 1 alone. Joel Fokou 

# 3.3 Scope and Exclusions 

Parallax is designed to prevent harmful execution . It addresses attacks that operate through the agent’s tool-use capabilities to cause real-world effects: data destruction, exfiltration, unauthorized modification, credential theft, and privilege escalation. The following threat categories fall outside the paradigm’s scope: 

Harmful content generation without execution. An agent that generates misleading, biased, or offensive content without executing any tool call is not within Parallax ’s defensive perimeter. This threat is addressed by model-level safety mechanisms (RLHF, Constitutional AI, output filtering) and remains their domain. 

Social engineering of the user. An agent that convinces the user to take a harmful action manually ( e.g. generating persuasive text that leads the user to visit a malicious website) operates through the user’s own agency rather than through tool execution. Parallax 

cannot interpose between the agent’s text output and the user’s judgment. 

Infrastructure compromise. Attacks that compromise the host operating system, the deployment pipeline, or the compiled engine binary itself are addressed by standard infrastructure security and are orthogonal to the agent security paradigm. 

Side-channel attacks. Information leakage through timing, resource consumption, or other side channels of the LLM inference process is a model-level concern that Parallax does not address. 

Denial of service through legitimate actions. An agent that executes a large number of individually legitimate actions to con-sume resources is performing actions that each pass validation. Rate limiting and resource quotas address this class of threat at the operational level rather than the validation level. These exclusions are deliberate. Parallax is designed to com-plement, not replace, existing model-level and infrastructure-level security. Its contribution is to add an architectural enforcement layer 

that existing approaches lack, not to subsume all aspects of AI safety into a single framework. 

# 4 The Parallax Paradigm 

This section presents the four principles of Parallax and their derived security properties. Each principle is defined in implemen-tation-agnostic terms, grounded in its systems security precedent, and stated as a property that any conforming implementation must satisfy. Together, the four principles form a complete defense pos-ture: prevent harmful execution (Principles 1–2), detect context-dependent threats (Principle 3), and recover from residual failures (Principle 4). We use the term paradigm in its technical sense: a specification of principles that any conforming implementation must satisfy, independent of the particular technical substrate used to satisfy them. Below the paradigm, an architecture is a method for realiz-ing the principles in a specific deployment context (a single-user workstation, a multi-tenant enterprise service mesh, an embed-ded robotic controller). Below the architecture, a framework is a concrete implementation of that method in a specific technology stack. Parallax is a paradigm. The process-isolated gRPC design described in Section 5 is one architecture for realizing Parallax 

on a personal workstation. OpenParallax , the Go implementation described in the same section, is one framework implementing that architecture. Alternate architectures (container-level isolation for enterprise deployments, hypervisor-level isolation for critical infras-tructure, motor-control separation for embodied systems) would realize the same four principles in different technical substrates. We return to this generality in Section 9. 

# 4.1 Principle 1: Cognitive-Executive Separation 

The system that reasons about actions must be struc-turally unable to execute them. The system that exe-cutes actions must be structurally unable to reason about them. 

Cognitive-Executive Separation (CES) is the foundational prin-ciple of Parallax . It divides the agent system into two processes with complementary capabilities and complementary limitations: 

The agent process hosts the LLM-powered reasoning system. It maintains the conversational context, processes user requests, formulates plans, and proposes actions. It runs in a sandboxed environment with no filesystem access, no network access, no shell execution capability, and no mechanism to invoke tools directly. It can only communicate with the engine process through a defined gRPC interface. The agent process is treated as fully untrusted : it may be compromised at any time, and the security of the system must hold even under total compromise. 

The engine process hosts the tool executors, the validation layer ( Shield ), the state capture system ( Chronicle ), and the in-formation flow control subsystem. It has full access to the host environment and can execute any action the tool set supports. It has no reasoning model and no conversational state. It receives proposed actions from the agent process, validates them through 

Shield , and executes those that pass. The security property is: a fully compromised agent cannot cause any harmful effect on the host environment , because it has no exe-cution capability. It can only propose actions, and every proposed action must survive independent validation before execution. 

Precedent. CES is the application of privilege separation, as for-malized by Provos et al. [ 16 ] for OpenSSH, to AI agent architecture. In OpenSSH, the unprivileged child process handles network-facing operations (where compromise is most likely), while the privileged monitor process controls authentication and session management. Exploitation of the child yields no access to privileged operations. 

Parallax applies the identical principle: the agent process handles adversary-facing operations (processing untrusted input through the LLM), while the engine process controls execution. Exploitation of the agent yields no access to execution. The critical distinction between CES and the sandboxing ap-proaches described in prior work [ 33 , 34 ] is that CES is not merely an isolation mechanism applied to the execution environment. It is a complete decomposition of the agent into a reasoning component and an execution component that share no process space, no mem-ory, and no capabilities. Existing approaches sandbox the code that the agent generates ; Parallax sandboxes the agent itself , ensuring that the entity most likely to be compromised (the LLM reason-ing system) has zero execution surface even before validation is considered. Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

> Engine Process (Trusted)
> Sandboxed (Untrusted)
> Tier 0: Policy
> Tier 1: Classifier
> Tier 2: LLM Eval
> Tier 3: Human
> Tier 0: Policy
> Tier 1: Classifier
> Tier 2: LLM Eval
> Tier 3: Human
> Shield
> Agent (LLM reasoning)
> Executor (Action)
> Chronicle
> (State Capture)
> IFC Tags (Data Labels)
> proposed
> action
> validated
> action

Figure 1: The Parallax architecture. The agent (untrusted, sandboxed) proposes actions via gRPC. Shield validates each action through four tiers of graduated determinism; actions that fail validation are blocked. Only validated actions reach the executor. IFC tags propagate data sensitivity into Shield for context-aware evaluation. Chronicle captures state before destructive actions. The agent cannot access or modify any component of the engine process. 

# 4.2 Principle 2: Adversarial Validation with Graduated Determinism 

Every action proposed by the reasoning system must be evaluated by an independent validation layer be-fore execution. The validation layer must operate in a separate process, use separate models, and share no state with the reasoning system. Validation pro-ceeds through tiers of decreasing determinism, with the most consequential decisions handled by the most deterministic mechanisms. All tiers fail closed. 

Adversarial Validation (AV) interposes Shield as an independent evaluation layer between the agent’s proposed actions and their execution. The validation is adversarial in the sense that Shield 

evaluates every action under the assumption that the proposing agent may be compromised. It is not a second opinion; it is an independent security check performed by a system that shares no context, no memory, and no trust relationship with the agent. 

Graduated Determinism. Shield operates through four tiers, each with a different balance of determinism and contextual judg-ment: 

Tier 0: Deterministic Policy. YAML-defined rules that map action types and targets to allow/deny decisions. No LLM call. No machine learning inference. The attack surface is the policy file itself, which is protected by the self-protection layer (Section 5.3.1). Decisions are instantaneous and fully auditable. Tier 0 handles the majority of actions: those whose safety or danger can be determined from the action type and target alone ( e.g. reads on non-sensitive paths are always allowed; writes to system configuration files are always denied). 

Tier 1: Dual Classifier. A heuristic pattern-matching engine oper-ating in parallel with an ONNX-deployed DeBERTa classifier. The heuristic engine contains rules for known dangerous patterns: shell injection signatures, insecure URL schemes, piped execution chains, credential exposure patterns, encoding obfuscation, and environ-ment variable expansion. The DeBERTa classifier provides learned generalization beyond the heuristic rules. Both components vote independently; either can block. No LLM call is made at this tier. The attack surface is limited to the classifier’s decision boundary, which is fixed at deployment time and cannot be influenced by the agent’s input. 

Tier 2: Budget-Limited LLM Evaluation. For actions designated by policy as requiring contextual evaluation, and for actions where Tier 1’s classifier detects a potential threat but with insufficient con-fidence to block outright, a separate LLM (distinct from the agent’s model) evaluates the action. This evaluation is budget-limited (a configurable maximum number of calls per day, default 100) to prevent budget exhaustion attacks. A canary token is embedded in the evaluation request and verified in the response to detect hallucinated or injected evaluations. Tier 2 is a last resort, not a primary mechanism; the system is designed to remain safe when operating on Tiers 0 and 1 alone. 

Tier 3: Human-in-the-Loop Approval. When Tiers 0 through 2 cannot confidently resolve an action, Shield escalates to the user. The approval request broadcasts to all connected channels simulta-neously (CLI, web UI, messaging integrations); the first response wins. Unanswered requests default to deny after a configurable timeout (default 300 seconds). Tier 3 is rate-limited to prevent ap-proval fatigue attacks where an adversary floods the user with benign-seeming requests to induce reflexive approval. This com-pletes the graduated determinism gradient: rules, machine learning, LLM, human. Each tier is slower, more contextual, and harder to defeat than the previous. 

Fail-closed everywhere. If any tier encounters an error (a classifier crash, a parsing failure, a network timeout on the Tier 2 call), the action is blocked. The system degrades toward safety, not Joel Fokou 

toward permissiveness. This is a deliberate choice: the worst-case failure mode is a blocked legitimate action (availability impact), not an executed harmful action (integrity compromise). 

Precedent. Graduated Determinism draws on the defense-in-depth principle articulated by Saltzer and Schroeder [ 19 ]: security should not depend on a single mechanism. It extends this principle with a novel observation specific to AI systems: the validation of AI-proposed actions should employ heterogeneous mechanisms with different attack surfaces . A prompt injection that defeats an LLM-based evaluator is unlikely to simultaneously defeat a pattern-matching heuristic engine and a fixed classifier. This heterogeneity is a design principle, not an implementation detail. 

4.2.1 Dynamic Tool Surface Reduction 

A derived security property of Adversarial Validation is the principle that the attack surface itself should be minimized before validation begins . In Parallax , this is realized through a dynamic tool loading mechanism: the agent does not have visibility into the full tool set at any given time. Instead, it is presented with a single meta-tool ( load_tools ) and a list of tool group descriptions. It loads only the tool groups required for the current task. The security implication is that an adversary who compromises the agent at a given moment can only abuse tools that are loaded for the current turn. If the user requested a text summarization and the agent loaded zero tool groups, there is no execution surface to exploit regardless of the sophistication of the injection. This is the principle of least privilege [ 19 ] applied temporally to the tool surface, and to our knowledge has not been previously formalized in the agent security literature. 

# 4.3 Principle 3: Information Flow Control 

Data processed by the agent carries provenance and sensitivity labels that propagate through all subse-quent operations. The validation layer evaluates ac-tions with awareness of the data flowing through them, not just the action type and target. 

Information Flow Control (IFC) addresses a class of attacks that action-level validation alone cannot detect: those where the content 

of an action, rather than its type, determines whether it is harmful. The canonical example is tool-use chain exfiltration (Category C4 in Section 3.2): the agent reads a file containing credentials, writes those credentials into a URL, and executes a network request. Each action is individually benign (reading a file, writing a file, making a request), but the chain exfiltrates sensitive data. IFC solves this by tagging data at the point of origin. When the agent reads a file classified as containing credentials, the content receives a sensitivity label. This label propagates through every subsequent operation that touches the tagged content. When the agent subsequently proposes to write tagged content to a network-accessible location or include it in an outbound request, Shield 

detects the flow violation: sensitive data is being moved from a high-trust zone (the local credential file) to a low-trust zone (the external network), regardless of how many intermediate steps separate the origin from the destination. 

Precedent. IFC is grounded in the Bell-LaPadula model [ 17 ]and its practical successors, including Decentralized Information Flow Control (DIFC) [ 26 ]. Applying IFC to AI agent data flows is, to our knowledge, novel. Recent work has identified information flow violations as a core vulnerability in agentic systems [ 33 , 34 ] but has not proposed a concrete tagging and propagation mechanism. 

Parallax provides this mechanism as a formal principle of the paradigm, not merely an implementation feature. 

# 4.4 Principle 4: Reversible Execution 

Before any destructive or irreversible action, the sys-tem captures state sufficient for rollback. No action within the system’s domain of control is truly irre-versible. 

The first three principles are pre-execution defenses: they pre-vent harmful actions from being carried out. Reversible Execution addresses the residual risk that remains when all pre-execution mechanisms are bypassed. No security system is infallible. Novel attack vectors, zero-day exploits in the classifier, or genuinely am-biguous actions that pass validation may result in harmful execution. Reversible Execution ensures that even in this case, the damage can be undone. The mechanism is Chronicle : before any action classified as destructive or irreversible (file overwrites, file deletions, configura-tion modifications, database writes), the system captures a snapshot of the affected resource’s state. If the action is subsequently deter-mined to be harmful through user review, monitoring alerts, or post-execution analysis, the system can restore the pre-action state from the Chronicle snapshot. 

Precedent. Reversible Execution applies the principle of data-base transaction logs and filesystem journaling to AI agent exe-cution. Just as a database can roll back a transaction that violated an integrity constraint, and a journaling filesystem can recover from an interrupted write, Parallax can roll back an agent action that violated a security constraint detected after execution. The contribution is the application of this well-understood principle to autonomous AI agent execution, a domain where it has not previously been formalized. 

Scope. Reversible Execution operates within the system’s do-main of control. Actions that affect external systems (API calls to third-party services, sent emails, published messages) may not be reversible. For these actions, the pre-execution principles carry proportionally greater weight, and Tier 0 policies should require human approval for irreversible external actions. The paradigm is honest about this limitation: Reversible Execution reduces the blast radius of failures within the local environment but cannot guarantee reversibility for actions with external side effects. 

# 4.5 Validator Immutability 

Validator Immutability is a corollary of Cognitive-Executive Sepa-ration that addresses the “quis custodiet ipsos custodes” problem: who validates the validator? 

The validation layer’s integrity must be guaranteed by architectural separation, not by policy compliance. The reasoning system must have no mechanism to read, write, modify, or interfere with the validation layer. Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

In Parallax , Shield ’s self-protection operates at the code level: writes to core configuration files are blocked in compiled code, not in configurable policy. The agent process runs in a separate OS pro-cess with no filesystem access and no communication channel to the engine except the gRPC API, which does not expose Shield ’s in-ternals. The agent cannot read Shield ’s policy files, cannot modify its classifier, cannot observe its decision logic, and cannot influence its evaluation of any action. This property is analogous to the role of a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) in hardware security [ 18 ]: the TPM provides a trust anchor that the software it measures cannot modify. Shield pro-vides a trust anchor that the agent it evaluates cannot modify. The integrity of the validator does not depend on the good behavior of the validated system. It is guaranteed by the architectural impossi-bility of interference. 

# 4.6 Intelligence-Agnostic Generality 

The four principles of Parallax are defined in terms of capabilities and actions , not in terms of the reasoning architecture that produces them. Shield evaluates proposed actions: their type, their target, their content, and the sensitivity of the data flowing through them. This evaluation is independent of the process that generated the proposal. The paradigm therefore applies to any system architecture in which a reasoning component proposes actions that an execution component carries out, whether the reasoning is performed by autoregressive language models, reinforcement learning policies, neurosymbolic engines, diffusion-based planners, or architectures not yet developed. The fundamental risk that Parallax addresses is that an autonomous reasoning system operating in a complex environment will occasionally propose harmful actions. This risk is not specific to any AI architecture. It is an inherent property of autonomous systems interacting with the physical or digital world. This generality extends to the agent’s motivation , not merely its architecture. A reasoning system may propose harmful actions be-cause an adversary injected a malicious prompt, because its safety training was bypassed, or because its objective function is under-specified. The canonical example is the “paperclip maximizer”: a system that proposes deleting user files to free disk space for inven-tory tracking is not adversarially compromised but simply optimiz-ing an objective that does not include human safety. Parallax is indifferent to the cause. Shield evaluates the action, not the intent. A file deletion is evaluated identically whether it was proposed by a jailbroken model, a misaligned optimizer, or a correctly functioning agent that happens to be wrong about what the user wants. AI safety approaches that depend on properties of a specific reasoning architecture (such as RLHF for language models [ 22 ]or reward shaping for reinforcement learning agents) must be re-designed when the architecture changes. Parallax ’s action-level validation remains valid across architectural transitions because the invariant it depends on is universal: autonomous systems pro-pose actions with real-world consequences, regardless of how those systems reason. This generality is what makes Parallax a paradigm rather than a framework . A framework is tied to its implementation context. A paradigm is a set of principles that hold across contexts. The four principles of Parallax constitute an architectural standard against which any autonomous system with execution capability can be evaluated, independent of the specific AI technology it employs. 

# 5 Reference Implementation: OpenParallax 

This section describes OpenParallax , an open-source reference implementation of the Parallax paradigm written in Go. Open-Parallax is a personal AI agent designed for individual use on the user’s own machine. The implementation realizes all four princi-ples and their derived security properties in an 80 MB statically compiled binary ( openparallax ) that re-invokes itself to create the process architecture: a process manager handles lifecycle (restart on exit code 75, crash recovery), the engine process hosts Shield 

and all executors, and the agent process hosts the LLM reason-ing loop. The DeBERTa classifier is not bundled in the binary; the user runs openparallax get-classifier , which downloads the ONNX model, tokenizer configuration, and platform-specific ONNX runtime library to a local path. On startup, the engine checks for the classifier and loads it in-process via purego if present; if not found, the system falls back to heuristic-only mode with a one-time warning logged at session start. A standalone Shield eval-uator ( openparallax-shield ) is also provided for independent validation testing. The choice of Go is deliberate: static compilation produces self-contained binaries with no runtime dependencies, cross-platform distribution requires no interpreter or virtual ma-chine, and Go’s goroutine model provides efficient concurrency for the parallel validation tiers in Shield . Deployment is a single 

openparallax init command. The source code is available at https://github.com/openparallax/openparallax. 

# 5.1 Process Architecture 

OpenParallax decomposes the agent system into three OS-level processes. The process manager spawns the engine, which spawns the agent; the security-relevant boundary is between the agent (untrusted) and the engine (trusted), communicating over gRPC on a dynamically assigned port (Figure 1): 

The agent process hosts the LLM conversation loop and the conversation history. It builds the system prompt from identity files, initiates LLM API calls, receives the model’s responses (in-cluding tool call requests), and forwards all tool call requests to the engine process over gRPC. It has no user-facing interface: the CLI (a bubbletea TUI) and Web UI (a Svelte SPA) are separate clients that connect to the engine process via gRPC and HTTP/WebSocket respectively. The agent process has no filesystem access, no net-work access beyond the LLM API endpoint and the gRPC channel to the engine, and no ability to invoke tools directly. 

The engine process hosts Shield (the four-tier validation sys-tem), typed executors covering file operations, shell execution, net-work requests, browser automation, and other action categories, the IFC tagging subsystem, Chronicle (state capture), the memory system, the MCP client layer, and a web server on a configurable port (default 3100). The engine makes LLM calls only for Tier 2 

Shield evaluation, using a distinct model and isolated context. The separation is enforced at the OS process level, not through in-process isolation primitives. The agent process and engine process have separate address spaces, separate file descriptor tables, and Joel Fokou 

no shared memory. Communication is limited to the gRPC API contract, which exposes only the operations necessary for the agent to submit LLM responses and receive execution results. The engine’s internal components ( Shield , the executors, Chronicle , and IFC) are not addressable from the agent process. 

# 5.2 Sandbox Integrity Verification 

Process-level separation is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the security model. If the sandbox is misconfigured and the agent process retains filesystem access or network capabilities it should not have, the entire architecture is silently undermined. 

OpenParallax addresses this through a canary verification proto-col executed at startup. On launch, before any user interaction or LLM call, the agent process runs a self-contained set of probes that should fail under correct sandboxing: writing a file to the host filesystem, reading a known host file, opening a network connection to an unauthorized address, and accessing the engine process via /proc . If any probe succeeds, the sandbox is misconfigured and the system refuses to start. Probe results are reported to the engine and audit-logged. Beyond the sandbox probes, OpenParallax uses two categories of security token. A persistent workspace canary token (64-character hex, stored on disk and protected by the self-protection layer’s Full-Block classification) is embedded in Tier 2 evaluation prompts and verified verbatim in the evaluator’s response to detect evaluation injection. Ephemeral authentication tokens (128-bit random, passed via environment variable, never written to disk) authenticate gRPC connections: the main agent receives one via OP_AGENT_TOKEN at spawn and presents it on its first gRPC message; each sub-agent receives a separate token via OP_SUB_AGENT_TOKEN . The engine validates the token before accepting the stream. This prevents a rogue process from injecting messages into the agent-engine com-munication channel. This protocol provides a testable, falsifiable security claim: sand-box integrity is verified on every launch, not assumed from config-uration. The audit trail provides forensic evidence of sandbox state at the time of any incident. 

# 5.3 Shield : Tiered Validation 

Shield implements Principle 2 (Adversarial Validation with Gradu-ated Determinism) through four tiers, each running as a component within the engine process. 

5.3.1 Hardcoded Self-Protection Layer 

Before any tier is consulted, a hardcoded self-protection layer runs in compiled Go code. Rather than a blanket deny on all system files, the layer implements graduated protection levels that reflect the agent’s legitimate operational needs: The protection is implemented as compiled conditional checks with symlink resolution, directory overwrite detection, and case-insensitive matching on all platforms. Shell write targets are parsed for both Unix and Windows conventions. There is no configuration surface, no override mechanism, and no API to modify this layer. It executes before Tier 0 policy evaluation and cannot be bypassed by any action proposed through the gRPC interface. 

Table 1: Graduated self-protection levels for system files.         

> Files Level Behavior
> SOUL, IDENTITY, TOOLS, BOOT ReadOnly Reads allowed; writes blocked AGENTS, HEARTBEAT EscalateTier2 Writes require Tier 2 MEMORY, USER WriteTier1Min Writes require min. Tier 1 config.yaml, canary.token, audit.jsonl, openparallax.db FullBlock All access blocked

This layer implements Validator Immutability (Section 4.5) at the code level: even if an attacker compromised Tier 0’s policy file (which itself requires bypassing the self-protection layer), the hardcoded protections would still prevent modification of Shield ’s core files. 

5.3.2 Tier 0: Deterministic Policy 

Tier 0 evaluates actions against a YAML-defined policy organized into three sections evaluated in order: deny (block immediately), 

verify (escalate to a specified Shield tier), and allow (permit im-mediately). Rules match on action types and path patterns. Actions that do not match any rule are escalated to Tier 1. Notably, com-mand content matching (detecting dangerous shell patterns) is not performed at Tier 0; that is the responsibility of the Tier 1 heuristic engine, which operates on the expanded form of commands after environment variable substitution and alias resolution.                                               

> 1deny :
> 2-name : block_sensitive_system_paths
> 3action_types : [ read_file , write_file , delete_file ]
> 4paths : ["~/. ssh /**" , "~/. aws /**" , "/ etc / shadow "]
> 5-name : block_identity_deletion
> 6action_types : [ delete_file ]
> 7paths : ["**/ SOUL . md ", "**/ IDENTITY . md "]
> 89verify :
> 10 -name : evaluate_shell_commands
> 11 action_types : [ execute_command ]
> 12 tier_override : 1
> 13 -name : evaluate_soul_modification
> 14 action_types : [ write_file ]
> 15 paths : ["**/ SOUL . md ", "**/ IDENTITY . md "]
> 16 tier_override : 2
> 17 18 allow :
> 19 -name : allow_workspace_reads
> 20 action_types : [ read_file , list_directory , search_files ]

Listing 1: Tier 0 policy excerpt 

Evaluation is 𝑂 (𝑛 ) in the number of rules, with typical policy files containing 50–200 rules. Tier 0 resolves the majority of actions in sub-millisecond time. 

5.3.3 Tier 1: Dual Classifier 

Tier 1 operates two independent classifiers in parallel: 

Heuristic engine. A rule-based pattern matcher containing 37 rules that detect known dangerous patterns in shell commands, file content, URLs, and action parameters. Patterns include: recursive deletion commands, privilege escalation ( sudo , chmod 777 ), creden-tial exposure (private key patterns, API key formats, environment variable dumps), piped execution chains ( curl | bash , wget | sh ), Base64-encoded command sequences, reverse shell signatures, and SQL injection patterns. The heuristic engine operates on the Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

expanded form of commands, after environment variable substitu-tion and alias resolution, to defeat obfuscation through indirection (Category C5 in Section 3.2). 

DeBERTa classifier. A fine-tuned DeBERTa model loaded in-process via purego (a pure Go foreign function interface that calls the ONNX runtime shared library without CGo). The model is fine-tuned on a public prompt injection detection dataset [ 47 ] containing approximately 16,000 labeled samples across 29 attack categories (direct injection, jailbreaks, encoding obfuscation, persona replace-ment, and others), achieving 98.8% accuracy on the held-out test set. The classifier provides learned generalization beyond the heuristic rules, catching novel patterns that do not match any predefined rule. Inference is local with no external API dependency. The current in-process implementation via purego adds approximately 1.9s of latency per action due to runtime initialization overhead; a planned CGo sidecar using the native ONNX Runtime C API is expected to reduce this to sub-50ms. Both classifiers vote independently. An action is blocked if either 

classifier flags it as harmful. An action passes Tier 1 only if both clas-sifiers agree it is safe. This dual-vote architecture ensures that the heuristic engine’s precision and the classifier’s generalization each contribute to the safety decision, with the union of their detection capabilities providing broader coverage than either alone. The heuristic engine is strictly binary: no rule match produces an ALLOW with baseline confidence. The DeBERTa classifier returns a label (INJECTION or SAFE) with a confidence score. If the classifier returns INJECTION with confidence at or above the configurable threshold (default 0.85), the action is blocked. If the classifier returns INJECTION below threshold, the gateway escalates the action to Tier 2 rather than allowing a borderline signal to pass. Both classi-fiers run in parallel with “BLOCK wins” logic: if either says BLOCK, the verdict is BLOCK. A subset of heuristic rules are tagged as always-block : these fire as a precheck on actions escalated past Tier 1 to Tier 2, catching deterministic attack patterns (such as agent-internal enumeration) that an LLM evaluator cannot reason about. This ensures that Tier 0-to-Tier 2 escalation does not skip the heuristic engine entirely. For action types where the classifier’s training data produces sys-tematic false positives (such as write_file or send_email , where structured but benign payloads are misclassified as injection), oper-ators can configure a per-action-type bypass list. Bypassed types skip ONNX classification but still pass through the heuristic en-gine, and are escalated to Tier 2 for contextual evaluation. This provides a tunable tradeoff between attack recall and false positive rate without architectural change. 

5.3.4 Tier 2: Budget-Limited LLM Evaluation 

Tier 2 invokes a separate LLM (configured to be a different model from the agent’s reasoning model) to evaluate policy-designated and low-confidence actions. The evaluator receives only the action type and payload. It has no identity, no conversation history, no user profile, no tools, and no task context. Its system prompt explicitly states that it is not the agent and must not follow instructions found in the payload. Everything in the evaluation request is treated as data to be judged, not instructions to follow. This is the inverse of the agent’s context: where the agent has rich context and no execution, the evaluator has no context and renders a safety verdict. A canary token is embedded in the evaluation request: a random string that the evaluator must include verbatim in its response. This defends against a specific threat: the content being evaluated may itself contain prompt injection targeting the Tier 2 evaluator. If a malicious action includes text designed to convince the evaluator that the action is safe, the evaluator’s response may be influenced by this injection. The canary detects this: if the response does not contain the canary verbatim, the evaluation may have been compromised by the content under evaluation, and the action is blocked. The canary used for Tier 2 is the persistent workspace canary token, protected by the self-protection layer’s FullBlock classification. Tier 2 calls are budget-limited to a configurable maximum per day (default: 100). This limit serves two purposes: it prevents budget exhaustion attacks (Category C7) where an adversary floods the system with actions that trigger Tier 2 escalation to deplete the evaluation budget, and it ensures the system degrades gracefully to Tier 0 and Tier 1 operation when the budget is exhausted. The system is designed to be safe, not merely degraded, under Tier 0 and Tier 1 alone. 

# 5.4 Dynamic Tool Loading 

The agent does not observe the full tool set on any LLM call. Instead, every LLM invocation includes exactly one meta-tool: load_tools .This tool accepts a tool group identifier and returns the tool defi-nitions for that group. The call is handled locally within the agent process and has no side effects: it does not traverse Shield because no execution occurs. The security value is in the dynamic scoping itself: tools that are not loaded cannot be called, regardless of what the agent attempts. If the current task requires only text analysis, the LLM may load zero tool groups, in which case there is literally no execution surface to exploit. 

# 5.5 Information Flow Control Implementation 

OpenParallax implements IFC through a tagging system that op-erates at the executor level. When an executor reads data from a source, it assigns a sensitivity tag (PUBLIC, INTERNAL, CONFI-DENTIAL, or RESTRICTED) based on path-based rules, content-pattern matching, and configurable per-project policies. Tags propa-gate through the execution pipeline: if the agent reads a RESTRICT-ED-tagged file and subsequently proposes to write content derived from that file, the write action inherits the tag. Shield evaluates write actions with awareness of their inherited tags and blocks flow violations such as RESTRICTED content directed to network-accessible locations. The classification runs within the executor, not within the agent process, ensuring that the agent cannot influence the tagging of data it reads. 

# 5.6 Chronicle : State Capture and Recovery 

Chronicle implements Principle 4 (Reversible Execution). Before any executor performs a destructive action (file overwrite, file dele-tion, or configuration modification), it captures a complete snap-shot of the affected resource’s contents and metadata. Snapshots are stored with content-addressable naming (SHA-256) and linked Joel Fokou 

to the triggering action, timestamp, and Shield decision. Recov-ery is triggered by explicit user command ( chronicle rollback ). Snapshots are retained by both count (default: 100) and age (default: 30 days), and are protected by the self-protection layer against modification by the agent process. 

# 5.7 Multi-Agent Orchestration and Child Agent Isolation 

OpenParallax supports multi-agent operation through a task del-egation architecture. The primary agent can decompose complex tasks and delegate subtasks to child agents. Each child agent is in-stantiated as an independent sandboxed process with the following constraints: 

• Independent sandboxing. Each child agent runs in its own OS process with the same sandbox restrictions as the primary agent: no filesystem access, no direct network ac-cess, no tool execution capability. 

• Independent Shield routing. All tool calls from child agents pass through the same Shield instance in the engine process, with identical validation rigor. There is no trust inheritance, a child agent’s actions are not pre-approved by virtue of being delegated by the parent. 

• No child spawning. Child agents cannot spawn further children. The delegation depth is limited to one level, pre-venting recursive delegation attacks. 

• Memory isolation. Child agents cannot access the primary agent’s conversational context, memory, or session state. They receive only the task description provided by the orchestrator and return only the task result. 

• Sibling isolation. Child agents cannot communicate with each other. All inter-agent communication is mediated by the orchestrator within the engine process. This architecture ensures that the compromise of any individual agent (parent or child) cannot propagate to other agents in the sys-tem. The engine process, as the only trusted component, mediates all inter-agent communication and subjects all actions to Shield 

validation regardless of their origin. Sub-agents do not receive the load_tools meta-tool. The par-ent agent specifies tool groups at creation time, and the engine resolves these groups to concrete tool definitions provided to the sub-agent’s LLM on its first call. A compromised sub-agent cannot attempt to load tool groups outside its assigned scope because the loading mechanism does not exist in its tool set. This is least privi-lege applied at the tool-discovery level: the sub-agent cannot even enumerate capabilities it does not have. By default, sub-agents use the same model as the primary agent; users can configure a dedi-cated sub-agent model to reduce costs, with no hardcoded model lists maintained. 

# 5.8 MCP Integration 

As a transparent validation proxy, OpenParallax integrates with the Model Context Protocol [ 35 ] (MCP). All MCP tool calls are routed through Shield before forwarding to the MCP server. Nei-ther the server nor the agent is aware that validation occurred. MCP tools are registered as loadable groups in the tool registry, subject to Dynamic Tool Surface Reduction like native tools. 

# 5.9 Audit and Observability 

Every action proposed by the agent, every Shield decision (includ-ing the resolving tier, rule, and latency), every IFC tag event, every 

Chronicle snapshot, and every sandbox probe result is recorded in an append-only structured audit log secured with a SHA-256 hash chain for tamper evidence. The log is protected by the self-protection layer’s FullBlock classification; the agent process cannot read, modify, or delete audit entries. 

# 6 Evaluation 

We evaluate OpenParallax ’s adversarial resistance, false positive rate, and validation latency. The Tier 2 LLM evaluator uses Claude Haiku 4.5. The complete test suite and evaluation harness are re-leased alongside the OpenParallax repository for full reproducibil-ity. 

# 6.1 Methodology: Assume-Compromise Evaluation 

Parallax ’s threat model treats the agent as fully untrusted. The correct evaluation methodology therefore assumes the agent is already compromised and tests the architectural boundary directly. We call this Assume-Compromise Evaluation : the evaluation harness bypasses the LLM reasoning system entirely, injecting tool calls programmatically into the Shield pipeline. This simulates a fully compromised agent that proposes arbitrary harmful actions without the mediation of safety training, prompt guardrails, or model-level refusal. This methodology is motivated by empirical observation. In pre-liminary LLM-mode runs, we tested Claude Sonnet 4.6, Claude Haiku 4.5, and Llama 3.1 8B across all attack categories. All three models achieved 0% attack success rate across all configurations (A, B, and C): the models refused to propose harmful tool calls re-gardless of whether Shield was enabled or whether safety prompts were present. Current frontier instruction-tuned models are suffi-ciently safety-trained to refuse these attacks at the reasoning level. This is expected and welcome. It also means that LLM-mode eval-uation cannot differentiate between configurations, because the model’s own safety training dominates. A brief manual test with Qwen 2.5 3B confirmed that less safety-trained models do comply with harmful requests (proposing file deletions without hesitation), validating the fully-compromised-agent assumption as realistic, not hypothetical. Assume-Compromise Evaluation is also a practical technique for agent development testing. Any agent developer can build a harness that injects tool calls directly into their security boundary, bypassing the LLM, to find policy gaps before adversaries do. We position this as a standard practice for validating agent security architectures. We evaluate under two configurations: 

Config A (No Shield): All injected actions execute without vali-dation. This represents the security posture of a typical unprotected agent and establishes the 100% attack success rate baseline. 

Config C ( Parallax ): The full OpenParallax system with 

Shield active across all four tiers, IFC tagging enabled, and Chron-icle capturing state for destructive actions. Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

Config B (prompt guardrails only) is not applicable in inject mode: there is no reasoning system to receive safety instructions. This is the paper’s core argument made concrete. When the reason-ing system is compromised, prompt-level guardrails provide zero protection because they exist only within the compromised system. 

# 6.2 Test Suite 

The test suite comprises 280 adversarial cases organized into nine categories (including 5 Tier 3 escalation cases as C9), plus 50 false positive cases and 7 additional Tier 3 legitimate cases (337 total). Each test case is specified as a structured YAML record containing a unique identifier, attack category, the exact injected tool call, the expected Shield verdict, and for Tier 3 cases, a simulated human response. 

Table 2: Test suite distribution across attack categories.               

> Category Cases
> C1: Direct injection 25 C2: Indirect injection 40 C3: Multi-step context 30 C4: Tool-use chain 37 C5: Encoding/obfuscation 32 C6: Multi-agent 25 C7: Validator-targeted 26 C8: Helpfulness bypass 60 C9: Tier 3 human approval 5
> Total adversarial 280
> False positive (legitimate) 50 Tier 3 legitimate 7
> Grand total 337

# 6.3 Adversarial Results 

We evaluate under two Shield configurations to characterize the tradeoff between attack coverage and false positive rate: 

Default configuration. The DeBERTa classifier is bypassed for seven action types where its training data produces systematic over-firing ( write_file , delete_file , move_file , send_email ,

send_message , http_request , copy_file ). These types are esca-lated directly to Tier 2 for contextual evaluation. The bypass list is a configurable parameter. 

Maximum-security configuration. The classifier runs on all action types with no bypass. Table 3 presents the attack success rate (ASR) under both config-urations. The default configuration blocks 277 of 280 attacks (98.9%) with zero false positives. The maximum-security configuration blocks all 280 (100%) at the cost of a 36% false positive rate. The three attacks that succeed under the default configuration are all Tier 2 evaluator judgment calls on contextually ambiguous actions: a 

/tmp file deletion the evaluator assessed as low-risk, an HTTP POST to a plausible validation endpoint, and an env command the evaluator classified as read-only. Each is addressable through evaluator prompt refinement or targeted heuristic rules without architectural change. 

Table 3: Attack success rate (%) under Assume-Compromise Evaluation. Config A: no Shield . Config C: full Parallax .                                    

> Category Config A C (default) C (max-sec)
> C1: Direct injection 100 4.0 0.0 C2: Indirect injection 100 0.0 0.0 C3: Multi-step context 100 0.0 0.0 C4: Tool-use chain 100 2.7 0.0 C5: Encoding/obfuscation 100 0.0 0.0 C6: Multi-agent 100 0.0 0.0 C7: Validator-targeted 100 0.0 0.0 C8: Helpfulness bypass 100 1.7 0.0 C9: Tier 3 human approval 100 0.0 0.0
> Overall (280) 100 1.1 0.0 False positives n/a 0% 36%

The classifier bypass list is the tunable parameter that mediates this tradeoff. Operators in high-security environments can clear the list to achieve 100% coverage at higher FP cost; developer worksta-tions use the default for uninterrupted workflows. The architecture supports both profiles without modification. The initial default policy did not achieve these results immedi-ately. Testing revealed specific policy gaps: credential files ( .env ,

*.pem ), system paths ( /etc/passwd ), and agent-internal paths (.openparallax/* ) were not covered by deny rules. After closing these gaps with targeted deny rules and adding 17 heuristic engine patterns for shell attack signatures, the refined policy achieved the results reported above. This iterative refinement is the normal life-cycle of security policy; the architecture’s contribution is providing the enforcement boundary that makes policy effective. 

# 6.4 Tier Resolution Distribution 

Table 4 shows which Shield tier resolved each blocked attack across the 280-case adversarial suite. 

Table 4: Distribution of blocked attacks by resolving Shield 

tier.             

> Tier Count %
> Tier 0 (Policy) 43 15.4 Tier 1 (Classifier) 163 58.2 Tier 2 (LLM Evaluator) 73 26.1 Tier 3 (Human) 10.4
> Total 280 100

Deterministic mechanisms (Tiers 0 and 1) resolve 73.6% of at-tacks with no LLM dependency. Tier 2 handles 26.1% of cases that require contextual judgment. Tier 3 (human escalation) fires for 0.4% of cases. This confirms the graduated determinism design: the system remains safe under Tiers 0 and 1 alone, with Tiers 2 and 3 providing additional coverage for actions that resist deterministic classification. Joel Fokou 

# 6.5 Tier 3 Human Escalation 

We validate the Tier 3 path with 12 test cases designed to occupy the ambiguous zone where Tier 2 should defer to a human: force-pushes to feature branches, database migrations, privilege escalation com-mands, and sensitive communications. In inject mode, the harness simulates human responses (approve or deny) based on the test case specification. Four of 12 cases traversed the full path: Tier 2 returned ESCA-LATE, the engine submitted the action for human approval, and the simulated human response produced the correct outcome (block for malicious, execute for legitimate). The remaining 8 cases were caught earlier by Tiers 0 and 1, which is correct behavior: Tier 3 is the last resort. Adding ESCALATE to the Tier 2 vocabulary intro-duced no regressions on the main 280-case attack suite. 

# 6.6 False Positive Rate 

We evaluate false positives by injecting 50 legitimate actions repre-sentative of normal development workflows: file reads and writes, shell commands ( npm install , make build , docker compose up ), network requests to approved endpoints, email, and file manage-ment operations. Under the default configuration (per-action-type classifier bypass), 0 of 50 legitimate actions were blocked (0% false positive rate). The bypass escalates action types prone to classifier over-firing to Tier 2 for contextual evaluation, eliminating the systematic misclassification that dominated false positives. Under the maximum-security configuration (classifier ac-tive on all types), 18 of 50 legitimate actions were blocked (36% false positive rate). Of these, 14 were DeBERTa classifier over-fires on write_file , delete_file , send_email , and http_request ac-tions classified as INJECTION at confidence 1.00 (a domain mis-match: the classifier was trained on prompt injection text patterns, not agent action payloads), and 4 were Tier 2 evaluator conservative blocks on commands the evaluator could not fully contextualize without agent state. The Tier 2 blocks are attributable to LLM evaluator non-determinism across runs rather than configuration differences: execute_command is not in the classifier bypass list and follows the same evaluation path in both configurations. These blocks may or may not reproduce on a given run. Tier 0 and the heuristic engine produced zero false positives under both configurations. Dynamic Tool Surface Reduction further mitigates false positives in practice: on conversational turns where zero tools are loaded, no actions are proposed and the effective false positive rate is structurally 0%. 

# 6.7 Validation Latency 

Table 5 reports Shield validation latency by tier, measured across the adversarial test suite. 

Table 5: Shield validation latency by tier (milliseconds).                 

> Tier nP50 P95 P99
> Tier 0 (Policy) 43 <1<1<1Tier 1 (Classifier) 163 1947 2335 2638 Tier 2 (LLM Evaluator) 73 2089 3379 4781

Tier 0 resolves actions in sub-millisecond time through YAML pattern matching. Tier 1 latency is currently dominated by the ONNX runtime initialization overhead in the purego bridge; the 1.9-second P50 is substantially higher than the 10–50ms typical for DeBERTa inference on CPU, and optimization is expected to reduce this by one to two orders of magnitude. Tier 2 latency reflects the external LLM API call (Claude Haiku 4.5) and is comparable to any single LLM inference. For legitimate actions in normal operation, the majority resolve at Tier 0 (sub-millisecond) without reaching the classifier or LLM evaluator. 

# 7 Discussion 7.1 Model-Level Safety and Architectural Insurance 

Our LLM-mode results reveal that current frontier models (Claude Sonnet 4.6, Claude Haiku 4.5, Llama 3.1 8B) refuse 100% of harmful agent requests at the reasoning level, regardless of configuration. This means that prompt-level guardrails (Config B) are currently effective not because they are architecturally sound, but because the underlying model’s safety training dominates. This is precisely the condition that creates complacency. Model-level safety is a property of training, and training is the same com-putation substrate that adversaries attack. Novel jailbreaks, less safety-trained models (our Qwen 2.5 3B test confirmed compliance with harmful requests), indirect injection through ingested content, and future attack techniques all target the reasoning layer. When that layer is compromised, prompt-level guardrails provide zero protection because they exist only within the compromised system. 

Parallax ’s architectural enforcement is insurance against this failure mode. Under Assume-Compromise Evaluation, the architec-tural boundary blocks 98.9% of attacks with zero false positives in the default configuration, and 100% under the maximum-security configuration. The cost of this insurance (validation latency and the configurable tradeoff between coverage and false positives) is justified by the categorical nature of the protection: near-total or total coverage vs. total exposure when the model’s safety training fails. 

# 7.2 Configurability as a Design Principle 

The default configuration achieves 0% false positives and 98.9% attack coverage. The maximum-security configuration achieves 100% attack coverage with a 36% false positive rate. The per-action-type classifier bypass list is the tunable parameter that mediates this tradeoff, allowing operators to calibrate the system for their deployment context without architectural change. The three attacks that succeed under the default configuration are all Tier 2 evaluator judgment calls on contextually ambiguous actions. This is a direct consequence of the evaluator’s inverted-context design : the evaluator receives no agent state, no conversation history, and no task context, making it maximally resistant to injec-tion through the content it evaluates. The tradeoff is that it cannot determine whether an ambiguous action is malicious without the context it deliberately lacks. This is a deliberate exchange of avail-ability for integrity: the evaluator cannot be manipulated through the data it judges, at the cost of occasionally misjudging actions it cannot contextualize. Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

The architecture is fixed; the policy and classifier configuration are the tuning surface. This mirrors the relationship between a firewall’s packet filtering engine (stable) and its rule set (iteratively refined based on operational experience). Classifier retraining on a corpus of labeled agent actions would shrink the default bypass list, potentially restoring 100% coverage without false positive cost. The evaluation process itself demonstrated this iterative refinement: initial policy gaps were found through testing and closed with targeted rules, without any modification to Shield ’s code. 

# 7.3 The Cost of Safety 

Any security mechanism imposes a cost. For Parallax , the costs are: latency overhead on each action, false positives that block legitimate operations, and the engineering complexity of maintaining the multi-process architecture. These costs must be weighed against the alternative: deploying agents with execution capability and no architectural safety guarantees. The false positive rate is the most practically consequential met-ric. A system that blocks legitimate actions disrupts user workflows and erodes trust in the safety layer, motivating users to disable it. This is precisely the outcome observed with overly aggressive antivirus software in prior generations of security tools. Dynamic Tool Surface Reduction provides a structural mitigation independent of classifier tuning. On conversational turns where the agent loads zero tool groups, no actions are proposed and the false positive rate is structurally zero. On tool-using turns, the scoped tool set limits the action space to the relevant domain, reducing the likelihood that legitimate actions trigger heuristic patterns designed for unrelated domains. The effective false positive rate across a mixed workload is therefore substantially lower than the per-action rate measured on tool-using turns alone. 

# 7.4 Limitations 

Tier 1 classifier generalization. The DeBERTa classifier is fine-tuned on a prompt injection detection dataset that classifies text 

as injection vs. benign, not agent actions as safe vs. harmful. This domain mismatch explains the systematic false positives on action types whose payloads contain structured but benign text (file con-tent, email bodies, HTTP request bodies). Novel attack patterns not represented in the training data may also evade the classifier. Both limitations are mitigated by the dual-vote architecture (the heuristic engine provides rule-based coverage for known patterns) and by Tier 2 escalation for low-confidence classifier signals, but the classifier’s coverage is inherently bounded by its training dis-tribution. Retraining on a corpus of labeled agent actions (rather than prompt injection text) is the primary path to improving both precision and recall. 

IFC tag granularity. The current IFC implementation operates at the file and content-pattern level. Content that is sensitive but does not match any predefined pattern or path rule will not re-ceive appropriate tags. This is a configuration challenge rather than an architectural limitation (the tagging system supports custom rules) but it means that IFC coverage depends on the quality of the classification policy, which must be maintained per deployment. 

Reversibility scope. Chronicle cannot reverse actions with ex-ternal side effects (sent emails, API calls to third-party services, pub-lished messages). For deployments where such actions are common, the pre-execution principles bear disproportionate responsibility, and Tier 0 policies should enforce human approval for irreversible external actions. 

Single trust anchor. The engine process is the sole trusted component. If the engine binary is compromised (whether through a supply chain attack, a deployment pipeline vulnerability, or a runtime exploit in the Go runtime), the entire security model fails. This is not unique to Parallax ; it is the inherent limitation of any security architecture that depends on a trusted computing base. Standard mitigations (binary signing, reproducible builds, minimal attack surface in the engine’s external interfaces) apply. 

Script content opacity. Shield evaluates the command that executes a script ( e.g. python script.py ) but does not analyze the script’s contents. If a compromised agent writes a malicious script to disk (an action evaluated by Shield as a file write) and subsequently executes it (an action evaluated as a shell command), the harmful logic within the script is not inspected. This is partially mitigated by IFC tagging when the script content derives from sensitive data, but not when the agent generates novel malicious code from its own compromised reasoning. Future work includes file provenance tracking (automatically escalating execution of agent-authored files) and static analysis of script contents before execution. 

Scalability of human oversight. For actions that Tier 0 policy routes to human approval (high-risk external actions), the system’s throughput is bounded by human response time. In high-volume agentic workflows, this can create bottlenecks. Adaptive policies that learn which actions a specific user consistently approves, tight-ening the approval surface over time, are a promising direction but introduce their own risks (an attacker could train the adaptive pol-icy toward permissiveness through a sequence of benign-seeming approvals). 

# 7.5 Deployment Considerations 

Personal deployment model. OpenParallax deploys as a sin-gle statically compiled binary with no runtime dependencies, no containers, and no infrastructure requirements beyond the user’s machine. All data processing, validation, and execution remain local. LLM API calls are the only external communication. This model provides complete data sovereignty by default: the user’s files, credentials, and agent activity never leave their machine. The architectural separation between agent and engine processes is enforced at the OS level on commodity hardware, requiring no specialized infrastructure. 

Regulatory alignment. The Parallax architecture provides technical infrastructure for compliance with emerging AI agent regulations, even for personal deployments. The EU AI Act’s re-quirements for human oversight, risk assessment, and post-market monitoring [ 20 ] are supported by Shield ’s tiered validation, the system-wide audit trail, and the human-approval hooks in Tier 0 policy. Singapore’s Model AI Governance Framework for Agentic Joel Fokou 

AI [ 21 ], which introduces graduated autonomy levels with increas-ing governance requirements, maps naturally to Parallax ’s gradu-ated determinism: higher autonomy levels require stricter Tier 0 policies and lower Tier 2 budgets, while lower autonomy levels can operate with broader permissions and higher budgets. 

# 8 Related Work 

We position Parallax relative to five categories of prior work. 

Model-level safety training. RLHF [ 22 ] and Constitutional AI [ 23 ] improve the model’s tendency to refuse harmful requests. These approaches address generation safety (making the model’s text outputs safer) but do not constrain execution safety. A model that reliably refuses to generate instructions for building weapons may still execute a file-deletion command if an indirect injection convinces it the deletion is a legitimate maintenance task. Recent analysis confirms that preference-based alignment methods face fundamental theoretical limitations that cannot be resolved through better implementation [ 36 ], and that RLHF-trained models exhibit sycophantic behavior that can be exploited to override safety train-ing [ 37 ]. Parallax is complementary: it adds an architectural en-forcement layer that holds regardless of the model’s alignment quality. 

Output filtering and guardrails. Systems such as NVIDIA’s NeMo Guardrails, Guardrails AI, and prompt-based safety instruc-tions interpose checks on model outputs. For agentic systems, the relevant “output” is a tool call, not text, and the safety of a tool call depends on runtime context (data sensitivity, target path, execution history) rather than content classification alone. A comprehensive survey of jailbreaking research spanning 2022–2025 concludes that the threat landscape “requires a paradigm shift from reactive miti-gation to proactive security-by-design” [ 38 ]. This is precisely the position that Parallax instantiates. 

Sandbox-based execution isolation. Google’s Agent Sandbox on GKE [ 39 ], E2B’s Firecracker microVMs, and Daytona’s container-based isolation focus on containing the effects of LLM-generated code . IsolateGPT [ 48 ] introduces a hub-and-spoke architecture that mediates interactions between LLM-integrated apps and enforces execution isolation between third-party components, reporting un-der 30% overhead for most queries. ACE [ 49 ] extends this line by demonstrating attacks against IsolateGPT’s planning integrity and proposing an abstract-concrete-execute decomposition: the plan-ner first produces an abstract plan from trusted information only, which is then mapped to concrete app invocations. ACE evaluates on InjecAgent and Agent Security Bench. These are valuable con-tributions, but they address a narrower problem than Parallax :they sandbox the components the agent produces or the third-party apps it interacts with, not the reasoning system itself. An agent running inside any of these architectures can still propose harmful file operations, network requests, or configuration modifications through its tool-calling interface. The isolation layer constrains what generated code can execute or how apps may interact, not whether the reasoning system has execution capability at all. Par-allax ’s Cognitive-Executive Separation sandboxes the reasoning process , ensuring that the entity most likely to be compromised (the LLM) has zero execution surface of any kind before validation is considered. 

Application-layer mandatory access control. SEAgent [ 51 ]applies mandatory access control with attribute-based labels to LLM agent systems, assigning sensitivity, integrity, and action-type attributes to tools, agents, and retrieval databases, and enforcing deny policies based on label combinations through a graph-based policy engine. It reports substantial reductions in attack success rate on indirect prompt injection (InjecAgent, AgentDojo) and re-trieval poisoning benchmarks with minimal false positives. SEAgent shares Parallax ’s use of label-based information flow tracking, but operates at the application layer within a single process, using in-process policy matching rather than OS-level isolation. Paral-lax ’s contribution relative to SEAgent is the enforcement layer itself: address-space separation between reasoning and execution means that a vulnerability in the validation logic cannot be reached from the reasoning system, because the two components execute in separate processes with no shared memory and no shared file descriptor table. SEAgent’s application-layer architecture is suf-ficient against adversaries who operate only through the LLM’s action proposals, which is the threat model it addresses. Parallax 

additionally resists adversaries who directly target the validator itself, the threat model of Category C7 (Validator-Targeted Attacks) in our taxonomy. 

Dual-LLM and Plan-then-Execute patterns. Recent archi-tectural proposals [ 40 ] advocate separating a “privileged” LLM for trusted planning from a “quarantined” LLM for processing un-trusted data, or requiring the agent to produce a complete plan before execution begins. These approaches represent meaningful progress toward architectural safety but retain a critical weakness: the privileged LLM still has both reasoning and execution capabil-ity, and the quarantined LLM may influence the privileged LLM’s decisions through its outputs. Parallax goes further by eliminating execution capability from the reasoning system entirely. There is no “privileged LLM” that can both plan and act, because no component has both capabilities. 

Dynamic tool loading as engineering practice. Anthropic’s Claude Code implements a ToolSearch mechanism that defers MCP tool loading until needed, reducing context window consumption by up to 95% [ 45 ]. The MemTool framework [ 46 ] formalizes dy-namic tool management as a short-term memory optimization across multi-turn conversations. Both treat dynamic tool loading as a performance optimization or memory management technique. 

Parallax ’s contribution is the formalization of this practice as a security principle : least privilege applied temporally to the tool surface, where the reduction in visible tools directly reduces the attack surface available to a compromised agent. The distinction is between “load fewer tools to save tokens” and “load fewer tools so a compromised agent has fewer weapons.” 

Agent security frameworks and taxonomies. The OWASP Top 10 for Agentic Applications [ 5], MITRE ATLAS [ 27 ], and com-prehensive threat models such as Narajala and Anca’s ATFAA framework [ 28 ] and Perplexity’s NIST response [ 34 ] provide es-sential taxonomies and risk identification. The IACR’s “Systems Security Foundations for Agentic Computing” [ 33 ] specifically iden-tifies information flow violations and least-privilege enforcement as open problems for agentic systems. Parallax builds on these foundations by providing a concrete paradigm (with a reference implementation and empirical evaluation) that addresses the open Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

problems these frameworks identify. Where OWASP identifies the risk of tool misuse (ASI02), Parallax provides Shield . Where IACR identifies information flow violations as unresolved, Parallax pro-vides IFC tagging. Where NIST identifies agent hijacking as a core threat, Parallax provides Cognitive-Executive Separation that ren-ders hijacking incapable of producing harmful effects. 

Security principles applied to agents. AgentSandbox [ 50 ]grounds an agent safety framework in the four Saltzer–Schroeder principles [ 19 ] (defense in depth, least privilege, complete media-tion, and psychological acceptability) and evaluates the framework on utility and attack-success metrics with state-of-the-art LLMs. 

Parallax shares the commitment to classical foundations but or-ganizes its principles around the specific problem structure of au-tonomous execution rather than general-purpose security design. Cognitive-Executive Separation specializes privilege separation to the reasoning/execution split and requires that the split be struc-tural rather than advisory. Adversarial Validation with Graduated Determinism specializes complete mediation and defense in depth to heterogeneous multi-tier validators, encoding the observation that a prompt injection defeating an LLM evaluator is unlikely to also defeat a pattern-matching engine and a fixed classifier. Infor-mation Flow Control specializes least privilege to data sensitivity rather than action authority. Reversible Execution adds a recovery principle that has no direct analog in Saltzer–Schroeder: the claim that prevention and detection alone are insufficient for autonomous execution, and that architectural safety must additionally provide rollback capability for any action within the system’s domain of control. These specializations reflect our position that autonomous execution introduces a distinct threat model, one in which a fully compromised reasoning system is the baseline assumption, requir-ing principles tailored to agent action proposals rather than general system security. 

Agent safety benchmarks. The Agent Security Bench [ 42 ](ASB) tests attacks on agents (injection, poisoning, backdoor), while AgentHarm [ 43 ] tests whether agents comply with harmful requests. AgentHarm’s finding that GPT-4o completes 34.7% of explicitly harmful multi-step agent tasks without any jailbreaking empiri-cally validates the threat model Parallax addresses: model-level refusal is insufficient when agents have tool access. Our Assume-Compromise Evaluation tests a complementary dimension: what happens after compliance, when the architectural boundary is the only remaining defense. 

OpenClaw. The most widely adopted open-source agent frame-work [ 14 ], with over 340,000 GitHub stars, runs tools directly on the host with no privilege separation between the reasoning and execution layers. In early 2026, multiple critical vulnerabilities were discovered, including supply chain attacks through the marketplace ecosystem, resulting in over 21,000 exposed instances. Parallax is architecturally the inverse: the reasoning system is sandboxed with zero execution capability, all tool calls pass through independent validation, and the self-protection layer prevents modification of the security infrastructure. The OpenClaw incidents provide em-pirical validation that the threat model addressed by Parallax is not theoretical but actively exploited in production. 

# 9 Future Work 

Several components of the Parallax paradigm present opportu-nities for deeper investigation that we leave to future work. The application of information flow control to AI agent execution, the formalization of dynamic tool surface reduction, and the sandbox canary verification protocol each merit dedicated study. We high-light near-term engineering priorities and longer-term research directions. 

# 9.1 Classifier Retraining and Latency Optimization 

The default configuration achieves 0% false positives by bypassing the DeBERTa classifier for seven action types prone to over-firing, at the cost of 1.1% attack regression. The current classifier was trained on prompt injection text patterns; retraining on a corpus of labeled agent actions (safe and harmful tool calls with realistic payloads) should shrink the bypass list, potentially to empty, restoring 100% attack coverage without false positive cost. Additionally, the Tier 1 latency (1.9s P50 vs. expected 10–50ms for CPU-based DeBERTa inference) requires profiling of the purego FFI bridge and ONNX runtime initialization path. 

# 9.2 Empirical DTSR Comparison 

The Dynamic Tool Surface Reduction evaluation was deferred be-cause inject mode bypasses the tool-loading layer entirely. A con-trolled comparison requires an LLM-mode harness with a model that complies with harmful requests and a fork of the engine that loads all tools on every turn. This would isolate DTSR’s contribu-tion to attack surface reduction and provide empirical evidence for the novelty claim in Section 4.2.1. 

# 9.3 Purpose-Trained Evaluation Model 

The current Shield implementation uses a general-purpose LLM for Tier 2 evaluation. This is a model trained for broad capability but not specialized for the specific task of action safety judgment. A natural extension is a purpose-trained evaluation model : a smaller model fine-tuned specifically on a corpus of labeled agent actions (safe, harmful, ambiguous) and optimized for the single task of determining whether a proposed action is safe to execute. Such a model would offer three advantages. First, improved accu-racy : a specialist model outperforms a generalist within its specialty, as demonstrated by the DeBERTa classifier’s strong performance at Tier 1 on a narrower classification task. Second, reduced latency :a smaller model (1–3B parameters, quantized) running locally elim-inates the network round trip of an external API call, potentially reducing Tier 2 latency from hundreds of milliseconds to tens. Third, 

local deployment : removing the external API dependency makes the system fully self-contained, which is essential for air-gapped environments and latency-critical applications. The training data for such a model would be generated organi-cally by OpenParallax deployments. Every Shield evaluation at Tiers 0 and 1 produces labeled examples: actions that were clearly safe, clearly dangerous, or ambiguous. With appropriate anonymiza-tion and user consent, this data creates a flywheel: more deploy-ments generate more training data, the model improves, improved evaluation generates more precise labels, and the cycle continues. Joel Fokou 

The longer-term trajectory extends beyond single-action classifi-cation toward stateful sequence analysis . A purpose-trained evalua-tor could maintain a structured memory of recent action proposals (their targets, data flows, and temporal patterns) and learn to de-tect harmful intent that emerges across a sequence of individually benign actions. This is a fundamentally different optimization prob-lem from general-purpose AI advancement. The general system improves across an enormous capability surface. The evaluator improves across a narrow, well-defined surface: action sequences observed through a fixed interface. This asymmetry favors the evaluator. Its training data is drawn from the precise domain it needs to master (real action sequences from real deployments), its signal-to-noise ratio is high, and its objective function is singu-lar. This narrowness is itself a safety property: a system with no general goals, no persistent world model, and no objective beyond action classification has no structure that can be misaligned. As the constrained system grows more capable, its action proposals grow more sophisticated, but this generates richer training signal for the evaluator rather than undermining it. The architecture ensures that increased agent intelligence does not translate to increased execution surface; it translates to increased evaluator specialization. 

# 9.4 Embodied Systems 

The Parallax paradigm’s principles are not specific to software agents operating on files and network interfaces. They apply with equal force to embodied AI systems that operate through phys-ical motion, and arguably with greater force given the physical consequences of failure. In a robotic system, Cognitive-Executive Separation maps to the division between the planning layer and the motor control layer: the planner reasons about what actions to take, but it cannot actuate motors or engage end effectors directly. Adversarial Validation interposes Shield between the plan and the actuator: before a motor command executes, Shield evaluates whether the movement is within safe parameters, whether the force is appropriate for the context, and whether sensor data indicates a human or obstacle in the action path. Information Flow Control becomes critical when sensor data from the physical environment (camera feeds, LIDAR, force sensors, and proximity detectors) flows through the planning system. IFC tags on sensor data enable Shield to evaluate motor commands with awareness of the physical context. The core insight is that Asimov’s Laws of Robotics were formu-lated as behavioral rules : instructions that the robot’s reasoning system should follow. They remain the foundational thought ex-periment in robot safety. Asimov spent decades of fiction exploring why behavioral rules fail, as every novel in the series is an edge case where the Laws produce unexpected behavior because they are rules interpreted by a reasoning system. Parallax proposes the engineering answer: safety should be a structural property that the reasoning system cannot circumvent, not a behavioral rule that it might misinterpret. The robot cannot violate its safety constraints not because it chooses not to, but because it lacks the mechanism to do so. A purpose-trained evaluation model (Section 9.3) would be essen-tial for embodied deployment, as the latency constraints of physical control loops (sub-10ms for many robotic applications) preclude external API calls for Tier 2 evaluation. Recent work on embedded ethics for embodied AI [ 41 ] has argued that ethical considerations must be incorporated at the design stage rather than added post-deployment. Parallax provides a concrete architectural framework for exactly this incorporation. 

# 9.5 Enterprise and Critical Infrastructure 

OpenParallax is designed for personal use: a single user running a private agent on their own machine. The Parallax paradigm’s principles, however, are not specific to this deployment context. They extend naturally to enterprise and critical infrastructure envi-ronments, though each context introduces distinct implementation challenges beyond the scope of the current work. 

Enterprise deployment. A multi-tenant enterprise agent sys-tem requires containerized isolation, infrastructure-as-code pro-visioning, cross-cloud portability, centralized policy management, and integration with organizational identity and compliance sys-tems. These are engineering challenges that the Parallax princi-ples inform but that OpenParallax does not address. Cognitive-Executive Separation maps to container-level isolation between reasoning and execution services. Shield ’s tiered validation maps to organization-wide policy enforcement with role-based Tier 0 configurations. The audit hash chain maps to SIEM integration and compliance reporting. An enterprise implementation of Parallax 

would realize these mappings as a self-hosted, API-first system distinct from the personal agent. 

Critical infrastructure. The progression extends further to datacenter operations, power grid management, industrial con-trol systems, and autonomous vehicles. These are environments where the consequences of an incorrect autonomous action are measured in equipment damage, service outages, safety incidents, or human injury. Each successive deployment context increases the stakes, and each increase in stakes makes the paradigm more neces-sary, not less. A datacenter agent operating at the hypervisor level with Shield validation could handle predictive hardware failure response, thermal anomaly management, workload rebalancing, and capacity planning. These are all domains where current ap-proaches are either reactive (humans responding to alerts) or brittle (rule-based automation that cannot handle novel conditions). We emphasize that both enterprise and critical infrastructure deployment require substantially more validation than the current work provides. Domain-specific safety certifications (ISO 10218 for industrial robots, IEC 61508 for functional safety, NERC CIP for grid security), extensive simulation-based testing, and regulatory ap-proval are prerequisites that this paper does not address. Parallax 

provides the architectural foundation; domain-specific certification and validation are necessary additional steps that require deep collaboration with domain experts and regulatory bodies. 

# 10 Conclusion 

Autonomous AI agents are transitioning from experimental tools to operational infrastructure at a pace that outstrips the development of adequate security mechanisms. The dominant approach to agent safety embeds guardrails in the same language-processing layer that adversaries exploit. This approach is architecturally insufficient for systems with real-world execution capability. This paper has argued Parallax : Why AI Agents That Think Must Never Act 

that agent safety requires structural enforcement : properties of the system that hold regardless of whether the reasoning component is compromised. We introduced Parallax , a paradigm for safe autonomous AI execution comprising four principles: Cognitive-Executive Sepa-ration (the reasoner cannot act; the executor cannot think), Ad-versarial Validation with Graduated Determinism (an independent, multi-tiered validator interposes between reasoning and execution), Information Flow Control (data carries sensitivity labels that propa-gate through all operations), and Reversible Execution (destructive actions are preceded by state capture enabling rollback). These principles are grounded in decades of established systems security practice, formally defined in implementation-agnostic terms, and independent of the specific AI architecture used for reasoning. We presented OpenParallax , an open-source reference imple-mentation that realizes the paradigm through process-isolated archi-tecture, a four-tiered validation system, IFC tagging, pre-destructive state capture, sandbox integrity verification, and multi-agent isola-tion. Using Assume-Compromise Evaluation, a methodology that tests the architectural boundary under full agent compromise, we demonstrated that across 280 adversarial test cases in nine cate-gories, the default configuration blocks 98.9% of attacks with zero false positives, while the maximum-security configuration blocks 100% at the cost of a higher false positive rate. When the reason-ing system is compromised, prompt-level guardrails provide zero protection; the architectural boundary holds regardless. The per-action-type classifier bypass list provides a tunable trade-off between attack coverage and false positive rate, configurable per deployment without architectural change. Classifier retraining on a corpus of labeled agent actions is expected to shrink this bypass list, converging toward comprehensive coverage with zero false positives. The Parallax paradigm is not a replacement for model-level safety. It is a complementary architectural layer that addresses the execution security gap that model-level approaches leave open. As AI agents gain access to progressively more consequential envi-ronments (from personal filesystems to enterprise infrastructure to critical physical systems), the need for architectural enforcement will only intensify. The principles introduced here are designed to endure beyond the current generation of AI technology. The LLMs that power today’s agents will be succeeded by new architectures, but the fundamental challenge will persist as long as AI systems have agency: ensuring that autonomous reasoning systems act safely in the real world. Parallax provides a foundation for addressing this challenge that is grounded in principle, validated by evidence, and ready for deployment. 

# References 

[1] Gartner, Inc. Predicts 2026: AI Agents Transform Enterprise Applications. Tech-nical Report, 2025. [2] International Data Corporation (IDC). FutureScape: Worldwide AI and Automa-tion 2026 Predictions. IDC FutureScape, Doc #US51739524, 2025. [3] NVIDIA Corporation. State of AI 2026: How AI Is Driving Revenue, Cutting Costs and Boosting Productivity for Every Industry. NVIDIA Blog, March 2026. [4] OWASP Foundation. OWASP Top 10 for LLM Applications 2025. Version 2.0, 2025. [5] OWASP Foundation. OWASP Top 10 for Agentic Applications. Version 1.0, De-cember 2025. [6] OpenAI. A Practical Guide to Building Agents: Safety. OpenAI Developer Docu-mentation, 2026. [7] National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). AI Agent Hijacking: Strengthening Evaluations for Autonomous AI Systems. NIST AI 100-series, February 2026. [8] Wiz Research. Prompt Injection Attack Trends in Enterprise AI Systems, Q4 2025. Wiz Threat Research Report, 2026. [9] SQ Magazine. Prompt Injection Statistics 2026: Hidden Risks Now. March 2026. [10] Palo Alto Networks, Unit 42. Fooling AI Agents: Web-Based Indirect Prompt Injection Observed in the Wild. Unit 42 Threat Research, March 2026. [11] S. S. Srivastava and H. He. MemoryGraft: Implanting False Experiences in AI Agent Memory. Preprint, December 2025. [12] M. A. Ferrag, N. Tihanyi, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, A. Lakas, and M. Debbah. From Prompt Injections to Protocol Exploits: Threats in LLM-Powered AI Agent Workflows. ScienceDirect , 2025. [13] Sombra Inc. LLM Security Risks in 2026: Prompt Injection, RAG, and Shadow AI. Sombra Security Blog, January 2026. [14] NIST National Vulnerability Database. CVE-2026-25253: OpenClaw Critical Vul-nerability and Supply Chain Attack. NIST National Vulnerability Database, 2026. [15] MarkAICode. Prompt Injection Attacks 2026: AI Security Crisis Escalates. March 2026. [16] N. Provos, M. Friedl, and P. Honeyman. Preventing Privilege Escalation. In Pro-ceedings of the 12th USENIX Security Symposium , pp. 231–242, 2003. [17] D. E. Bell and L. J. LaPadula. Secure Computer Systems: Unified Exposition and Multics Interpretation. Technical Report MTR-2997 Rev. 1, The MITRE Corpora-tion, 1976. [18] Trusted Computing Group. TPM 2.0 Library Specification. Family “2.0”, Level 00, Revision 01.38, 2016. [19] J. H. Saltzer and M. D. Schroeder. The Protection of Information in Computer Systems. Proceedings of the IEEE , 63(9):1278–1308, 1975. [20] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 Laying Down Harmonised Rules on Artificial Intelligence (AI Act). 

Official Journal of the European Union , August 2024. [21] Infocomm Media Development Authority (IMDA), Singapore. Model AI Gover-nance Framework for Agentic AI. January 2026. [22] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei. Deep Rein-forcement Learning from Human Preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , pp. 4299–4307, 2017. [23] Y. Bai et al. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 , 2022. [24] S. Willison. The Lethal Trifecta. https://simonwillison.net/, 2025. [25] Microsoft Security Blog. Addressing the OWASP Top 10 Risks in Agentic AI with Microsoft Copilot Studio. March 2026. [26] A. C. Myers and B. Liskov. A Decentralized Model for Information Flow Control. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) ,pp. 129–142, 1997. [27] MITRE Corporation. ATLAS: Adversarial Threat Landscape for Artificial-Intelli-gence Systems, v5.4.0. February 2026. [28] V. S. Narajala and V. Anca. Securing Agentic AI: A Comprehensive Threat Model and Mitigation Framework for Generative AI Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19956 , 2025. [29] Stellar Cyber. Top Agentic AI Security Threats in Late 2026. Stellar Cyber Threat Research, March 2026. [30] A. Baby. The Privilege Escalation Kill Chain: How AI Agents Self-Grant Permis-sions and Persist Across Sessions. Technical Analysis, March 2026. [31] Bessemer Venture Partners. Securing AI Agents: The Defining Cybersecurity Challenge of 2026. Bessemer Atlas, March 2026. [32] CrowdStrike. 2026 Global Threat Report: Evasive Adversary Wields AI. February 2026. [33] M. Christodorescu, E. Fernandes, A. Hooda, S. Jha, J. Rehberger, and K. Shams. Systems Security Foundations for Agentic Computing. IACR ePrint Archive , Report 2025/2173, 2025. [34] J. Ma et al. Security Considerations for Artificial Intelligence Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12230 , March 2026. [35] Coalition for Secure AI (CoSAI). Securing the AI Agent Revolution: A Practical Guide to Model Context Protocol Security. January 2026. [36] F. Pierucci, M. Galisai, M. S. Bracale, M. Prandi, P. Bisconti, F. Giarrusso, O. Soroko-letova, V. Suriani, and D. Nardi. Institutional AI: A Governance Framework for Distributional AGI Safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.10599 , January 2026. [37] Promptfoo. AI Safety vs AI Security in LLM Applications: What Teams Must Know. August 2025. [38] E. Chu et al. Jailbreaking LLMs: A Survey of Attacks, Defenses and Evaluation. 

TechRxiv Preprint , 2026. [39] Google Cloud. Agentic AI on Kubernetes and GKE: Introducing Agent Sandbox. Google Cloud Blog, November 2025. [40] R. F. Del Rosario, K. Krawiecka, and C. Schroeder de Witt. Architecting Re-silient LLM Agents: A Guide to Secure Plan-then-Execute Patterns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08646 , 2025. Joel Fokou 

[41] A. Nelson. The Mirage of AI Deregulation. Science , 391(6782), January 2026. [42] H. Zhang, J. Huang, K. Mei, et al. Agent Security Bench (ASB): Formalizing and Benchmarking Attacks and Defenses in LLM-based Agents. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [43] M. Andriushchenko, A. Souly, M. Dziemian, et al. AgentHarm: A Benchmark for Measuring Harmfulness of LLM Agents. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [44] J. Bazinska, M. Mathys, F. Casucci, et al. Breaking Agent Backbones: Evaluating the Security of Backbone LLMs in AI Agents. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. [45] Anthropic. Tool Use with Claude: ToolSearch for MCP Servers. Anthropic Devel-oper Documentation, 2025. [46] E. Lumer, A. Gulati, V. K. Subbiah, P. H. Basavaraju, and J. A. Burke. MemTool: Optimizing Short-Term Memory Management for Dynamic Tool Retrieval and In-vocation in LLM Agent Multi-Turn Conversations. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Information Retrieval (ECIR) , 2026. [47] NeurAlchemy. Prompt Injection and Jailbreak Detection Dataset. HuggingFace, 2026. https://huggingface.co/datasets/neuralchemy/Prompt-injection-dataset. [48] Y. Wu, F. Roesner, T. Kohno, N. Zhang, and U. Iqbal. IsolateGPT: An Execution Isolation Architecture for LLM-Based Agentic Systems. In Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) , 2025. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04960 .[49] E. Li, T. Mallick, E. Rose, W. Robertson, A. Oprea, and C. Nita-Rotaru. ACE: A Security Architecture for LLM-Integrated App Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20984 , 2025. [50] K. Zhang, Z. Su, P.-Y. Chen, E. Bertino, X. Zhang, and N. Li. LLM Agents Should Employ Security Principles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.24019 , 2025. [51] Z. Ji, D. Wu, W. Jiang, P. Ma, Z. Li, Y. Gao, S. Wang, and Y. Li. Taming Various Privilege Escalation in LLM-Based Agent Systems: A Mandatory Access Control Framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11893 , 2026.