Title: How Far Are Vision-Language Models from Constructing the Real World? A Benchmark for Physical Generative Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.24866v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:22:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# How Far Are Vision-Language Models from Constructing the Real World? A Benchmark for Physical Generative Reasoning 

# Luyu Yang Yutong Dai An Yan Viraj Prabhu Ran Xu Zeyuan Chen Salesforce AI Research 

Figure 1. DreamHouse benchmark samples. Each row shows a single structure across five representations: material schedule (member counts by subsystem), foundation, two intermediate framing stages, and complete timber frame, alongside the target exterior rendering from which the model must infer the hidden structural system. Three of the 13 architectural styles are shown: Split-Level (678 members), Cruciform (1,350 members), and Barn (845 members). Member counts span four subsystems: foundation (Fdn), floor, walls, and roof. 

# Abstract 

The physical world is not merely visual; it is gov-erned by rigorous structural and procedural con-straints. Yet, the evaluation of vision-language models (VLMs) remains heavily skewed toward perceptual realism, prioritizing the generation of visually plausible 3D layouts, shapes, and appear-ances. Current benchmarks rarely test whether models grasp the step-by-step processes and phys-ical dependencies required to actually build these artifacts—a capability essential for automating design-to-construction pipelines. To address this, we introduce DreamHouse , a novel benchmark for physical generative reasoning : the capac-ity to synthesize artifacts that concurrently sat-

> arXiv:2603.24866v1 [cs.AI] 25 Mar 2026

isfy geometric, structural, constructability, and code-compliance constraints. We ground this benchmark in residential timber-frame construc-tion, a domain with fully codified engineering stan-dards and objectively verifiable correctness. We curate over 26,000 structures spanning 13 ar-chitectural styles—each verified to construction-document standards (LOD 350)—and develop a deterministic 10-test structural validation frame-work. Unlike static benchmarks that assess only final outputs, DreamHouse supports iterative agen-tic interaction. Models observe intermediate build states, generate construction actions, and receive structured environmental feedback, enabling a fine-grained evaluation of planning, structural reason-ing, and self-correction. Extensive experiments with state-of-the-art VLMs reveal substantial ca-pability gaps that are largely invisible on exist-ing leaderboards. These findings establish physi-cal validity as a critical evaluation axis orthogo-nal to visual realism, highlighting physical gener-ative reasoning as a distinct and underdeveloped frontier in multimodal intelligence. Available at https://luluyuyuyang.github.io/dreamhouse 

# 1. Introduction 

The physical world is not merely a surface; it is a rigorous system of constraints [11, 29, 31, 32, 38, 41, 45, 52]. A floor must bear load, a rafter must respect its allowable span, and a wall must continu-ously transfer force from roof to foundation. These are not aesthetic choices, but fundamental physical realities. Yet, the dominant evaluation paradigm for generative vision models treats the world as purely visual, asking only if a model can produce outputs that look ‘correct [6, 16, 18, 24, 42, 44]. Whether those outputs could physically stand is a question the field has largely left unasked. While the recent surge in vision-language mod-els (VLMs) has yielded remarkable perceptual ca-pabilities, evaluating their grasp of physical laws remains in its infancy [13, 14, 35, 44, 53]. Re-cent benchmarks like PhysBench [14] and VSI-Bench [13] probe physical reasoning and spatial recall, but they are fundamentally comprehension 

tasks—the model observes, answers, and is scored. They do not evaluate whether a model can build .Generating a physically realizable artifact from scratch, under strict engineering constraints and without visible ground truth, requires moving be-yond passive observation. Between perceiving a structure and constructing one lies a critical gap that standard benchmarks fail to measure. To bridge this gap, we introduce DreamHouse ,a novel benchmark designed to evaluate physi-cal generative reasoning —the capacity to synthe-size artifacts that concurrently satisfy geometric, structural, and code-compliance constraints. We ground our benchmark in residential timber-frame construction. This domain provides fully codified correctness criteria and discrete, verifiable compo-nents, while remaining visually complex enough to prove that perceptual plausibility alone is insuffi-cient. DreamHouse comprises over 26,000 struc-turally verified models spanning 13 architectural styles. Furthermore, we provide a suite of 10 deter-ministic, physics-based tests covering load paths, span limits, member connectivity, etc. . Crucially, these tests operate directly on the scene graph, bypassing the need for computationally expensive simulations. The DreamHouse task is formulated as an iter-ative generation process: given rendered views of a target structure, a model must generate Blender Python construction code, process structured vali-dation feedback, and refine its output until all struc-tural tests pass. We evaluate performance across three protocols with varying degrees of external scaffolding (Planner-Atomic, Planner-Reactive and Planner-Managed) and two input conditions (bare framing visible, Frame , versus occluded by fin-ished cladding, Facade ). This framework serves as a controlled ablation study, isolating whether gen-eration failures stem from weak spatial reasoning, deficient planning, or an inability to self-correct. Our extensive evaluation of three frontier VLMs inclyding GPT-5 [37], Gemini 3 [2] and Claude 4.5 [1] across more than 20,000 independent agen-tic tasks reveals striking limitations in current state-of-the-art models. Notably, models that excel on standard coding and reasoning leaderboards often struggle with physical generation; highly-ranked generalists frequently underperform compared to their peers when evaluated under our structured protocols. Even the most capable model achieves a joint pass rate of merely 7.1% , successfully satisfying both structural validity and visual fi-delity simultaneously. These findings demonstrate that physical generative reasoning is not a natu-ral byproduct of general intelligence, but rather a distinct, underdeveloped capability axis demanding dedicated evaluation. Our contributions: • Physical generative reasoning as a novel VLM evaluation axis, distinct from perception, com-prehension, and simulation-based benchmarks. • The DreamHouse benchmark , comprising 26,000+ verified timber-frame structures across 13 architectural styles with multi-view render-ings and construction phase-wise annotations. • A 10-test structural validation suite that is de-terministic and simulation-free, covering Interna-tional Residential Code (IRC) compliance [15], physics, geometry, and fabrication details. • A three-protocol agentic evaluation frame-work , showing that scaffold design is as impor-tant as model selection for physical generation tasks. 

# 2. Related Work 

Physical and Spatial Benchmarking for VLMs. 

A growing body of work exposes systematic gaps between VLM semantic fluency and physical-world grounding [13, 14, 23, 34, 35, 53]. Phys-Bench [14] evaluates 75 VLMs on 10K video-image-text entries spanning object properties, rela-tionships, and dynamics, finding that models excel at static recognition but fail on Newtonian dynam-ics, a deficiency attributed to missing physical pri-ors rather than perceptual limits. VSI-Bench [48] measures metric visual-spatial intelligence (dis-tances, sizes, directions) from egocentric video, showing that standard chain-of-thought prompting 

degrades spatial estimation, models must instead build explicit cognitive maps. Think-with-3D [13] endows VLMs with 3D geometric imagination via latent alignment and RL-based spatial rewards, en-abling occluded geometry completion from sparse views. These benchmarks evaluate passive phys-ical understanding: answering questions about or reconstructing observed scenes. DreamHouse tar-gets the harder generative gap, producing structures that are themselves physically valid, without any reference structure to recall. 

3D Scene Generation. Large-scale 3D gener-ative models [6, 18, 24, 27, 42, 44, 54] opti-mize photometric or geometric metrics against ref-erence renderings, leaving structural validity un-measured. TRELLIS [47] achieves state-of-the-art image-conditioned 3D generation via sparse voxel latents, but its representation is derived entirely from visual observations, a generated house mesh may score well on Chamfer distance while fail-ing every structural test. SpatialGen [19] gener-ates photorealistic indoor scenes conditioned on 3D layouts, operating at rendering-grade level-of-detail for design visualization. DreamHouse oper-ates at fabrication-grade detail (LOD 350), speci-fying member species, cross-sections, and connec-tions sufficient for construction scheduling, com-plementary positions in the AEC pipeline. 

Code-Driven Structured Generation. A pro-ductive line of work [12, 17, 39, 40, 50, 55] has VLMs write executable programs verified by domain-specific oracles, consistently outper-forming direct pixel-level synthesis for structured outputs. DreamHouse adopts this architecture but replaces the visual oracle with deterministic engineering compliance. VIGA [51] frames inverse graphics as a long-horizon agentic loop (WRITE →RUN →RENDER →COMPARE →REVISE ), demonstrating that iterative execution feedback recovers performance where single-shot VLMs fail. Its feedback signal is photometric; structural failures (missing members, span violations) are invisible to any rendering oracle. BlenderGym [21] benchmarks VLMs on Blender editing tasks via LPIPS/CLIP-I, sharing our infrastructure but evaluating visual imitation rather than structural correctness. MCP-Universe [28] benchmarks LLM agents across six domains including 3D Design, where even GPT-5 achieves only 43.7% success; DreamHouse provides the domain-specific 16-test physical validation absent from its 3D tasks. Auto-Present [20] and Chart2Code [40] further confirm that programmatic generation dominates pixel-level synthesis for structured outputs; DreamHouse extends this finding to 3D structural engineering where constraints are physical law rather than aesthetic convention. 

Physically-Grounded Assembly. The works clos-est to DreamHouse require agents to produce phys-ical assemblies whose validity is determined by physics, not appearance [9, 26, 43]. BrickGPT [34] is the most directly analogous: it formulates LEGO assembly as next-token prediction with physics-aware rollback, explicitly framing its contribution as “buildable, not just renderable.” The technical gap is substantial: LEGO involves isotropic ma-terial with uniform stud connectivity and a sin-gle stability check (center-of-mass within support polygon), whereas timber framing involves or-thotropic material, heterogeneous connection me-chanics, and multi-condition verification (load-path connectivity, section modulus compliance, IRC span limits, assembly dependency ordering). Beyond domain complexity, BrickGPT [34] is a trained generation method; DreamHouse is an eval-uation benchmark. Video2Policy [49] instantiates the same visual-to-executable-program paradigm for robotic manipulation, representing a comple-mentary instance of visual-to-physical program synthesis in a distinct physical domain. 

# 3. DreamHouse Benchmark 

We construct DreamHouse , a benchmark for phys-ical generative reasoning grounded in residential timber-frame construction. It comprises (1) a large-scale dataset of structurally verified structures paired with multi-view renderings, and (2) a deter-ministic validation suite of 10 physics-based tests scoring any generated structure against engineering and code-compliance standards [15, 33]. Together they define both the task and the metric, enabling objective evaluation of whether a model can con-struct , not merely depict, the physical world. 

3.1. Benchmark Construction 

Testbed choice. Residential timber framing is an unusually well-suited domain for evaluating phys-ical generative reasoning: its correctness criteria are fully codified (load-path integrity, member siz-ing, connection geometry, assembly order) and ob-jectively verifiable without human annotation [46]. The domain is also visually rich and stylistically di-verse, making perceptual plausibility a meaningful but insufficient criterion. Before this choice, we pi-loted an alternative bridge-generation testbed but found that frontier VLMs could easily satisfy all validation tests by recovering a small set of geo-metric parameters analytically from the image, by-passing structural understanding entirely; see Ap-pendix for details. Timber framing forecloses this shortcut: member spacing, connection hierarchy and load-path topology are not directly legible from exterior renders, and no analytic inversion exists. 

Parametric generation and dataset scale. Each structure originates from a JSON configuration defining footprint dimensions, story count, roof pitch, overhang depth. A procedural Blender Python generator instantiates this into a fully re-solved 3D timber-frame model with human in the loop — individual foundation sills, floor joists, wall studs, headers, ridge beams, rafters, and collar ties, each at the correct position, orientation, and IRC cross-section, with member identities and parent-child relationships preserved in a structured scene graph. We identify 13 canonical residential styles [25] whose structural logic is sufficiently distinct to stress different aspects of the reasoning pipeline: A-Frame , Barn , Carriage , Colonial , Courtyard , Cru-ciform , Farmhouse , Ranch , Saltbox , Shotgun , Split-Level , Townhouse , and Z-Plan . These span single-and multi-story footprints, symmetric and asym-metric roofs, and rectangular to complex multi-wing plans (Figure 2 and Figure 1). After filter-ing through the full validation suite, the released dataset contains 26,543 provably buildable struc-tures , ranging from 133 to 1,548 members (mean 673, median 656), partitioned into Foundation, Floor, Walls, and Roof categories [5]. All struc-tures are rendered from five canonical viewpoints using Blender [22] Cycles. All structures meet 

LoD 350 (fabrication-grade); see Appendix for de-Figure 2. DreamHouse Dataset Overview. (Top) Dataset statistics showing member count distributions (box plots, left axis) and style proportions (dashed line, right axis) across all 13 architectural styles, ordered by decreasing structural complexity. Member counts range from 133 to 1,548 (mean 673). (Bottom) Representative Cycles-rendered timber frame structures for each style: Courtyard, Cruciform, Colonial, Split-Level, Barn, Ranch, Townhouse, Z-Plan, Carriage, Farmhouse, Saltbox, Shotgun, A-Frame , spanning complex multi-wing configurations to compact single-story forms. 

tails .

Structural Validation Suite. The suite com-prises 10 deterministic tests in three pillars oper-ating directly on the scene graph. With no physics simulation required, our evaluation can be fast, de-terministic, and interpretable (Figure 3); full math-ematical definitions are provided in Appendix .

3.2. Task Formalization 

We formalize evaluation as a family of agentic gen-eration tasks . Let A denote the agent (VLM), E the executor (Blender environment), and V the struc-tural validator. At each turn t, A receives observa-tion ot = ( I0, f t−1), where I0 is the fixed multi-view task input and ft−1 is structured validation feedback from the previous turn, and produces a Blender Python action at. E applies at to tran-sition the scene graph st−1 → st, and V evalu-ates st to produce feedback ft reporting per-test pass/fail status and violation counts (e.g., “Beam-Post gap exceeds 3.0 m; detected spacing 7.0 m between BeamPost_01 and rim” ). This feedback closes the loop: ft becomes part of ot+1 . On fail-ure, the agent retries from the same scene state 

st without resetting context; the full conversation history Ht = ( I0, a 1, f 1, . . . , a t−1, f t−1) is pre-served across all retries. Before writing any code, 

A produces a hierarchical JSON plan specifying member categories, phase ordering, and assembly Figure 3. Structural Validation Suite. 10 tests across four pillars. IRC Compliance (left): load path, span limits, completeness, stability score. Structure Physics (center-left): L/360 deflection, cantilever ratio, point load bearing.    

> Geometric Integrity (center-right): dual-end restraint, gap detection, roof coverage. LoD 350 (right): fabrication-grade member geometry.

dependencies. Each task enforces a per-step retry budget Rstep and a global budget Rglobal .We instantiate three protocols that vary the de-gree of external phase management, forming a con-trolled ablation over agentic scaffold design.The same deterministic validation suite V used to cer-tify benchmark structures during dataset construc-tion serves as the evaluation signal during task ex-ecution, ensuring ground-truth and assessment cri-teria are fully aligned. 

Planner-Atomic ( TS ). A receives o1 = ( I0, ∅)

and generates a complete construction script a1

covering all member categories in a single code block. On failure, at is regenerated from updated 

Ht; accepted when V(st) passes all 10 tests or 

Rglobal is exhausted. This protocol tests holistic single-pass structural synthesis with no intermedi-ate feedback between phases. 

Planner-Reactive (TQ). A generates a single script covering all K construction phases in a self-determined order. After each phase k is mate-rialized into st, it is evaluated against Vmid ⊂V (load path and stability); failure triggers full script regeneration from Ht, invalidating all phases 

k+1 , . . . , K . Unlike TS , the model must re-plan all phase interdependencies in context after each fail-ure — combining the demands of holistic planning and sequential commitment without any external scaffolding. 

Planner-Managed (TW ). A generates scripts one phase at a time under external phase manage-ment. The scene st persists across phases; each phase must pass Vmid before the next is unlocked, with up to Rstep retries per phase. A failure at phase k never invalidates st−1: only at is regener-ated, leaving all prior scene state intact. This proto-col provides the strongest external scaffolding and isolates each phase as an independent sub-task. 

Iterative Refinement with Visual Feedback ( TE ). 

Beyond the core generation protocols, we introduce an exploratory editing task to test whether models can refine visual alignment without breaking an al-ready valid structure. Starting from sT that passed 

V under TS but achieved visual fidelity score S < τ 

(see Section 3.3), A iteratively refines st while pre-serving structural validity. Feedback ft is aug-mented with a rendered side-by-side comparison against the target; V is re-run at every iteration and Figure 4. Task formalization example Planner-Managed. Top (agent loop): Evaluation is formalized as a recurrent agentic process. At each turn t, the agent A (VLM) receives observation ot = ( I0, f t−1), the original multi-view task image I0 and structured validation feedback ft−1 from the previous turn, and generates a Blender Python action at. The executor E applies at to transition the scene graph st−1 → st, and the validator V produces feedback ft reporting per-test pass/fail and violation counts. This feedback becomes the input observation for the next turn, closing the loop. On failure (e.g., f2, red), the agent retries from the same scene state s2 without resetting context. A, E, and V are omitted from the diagram for visual clarity; see Section 3.2 for full formalization. Bottom (task instantiation): The task input 

I0 consists of five rendered views of the target structure paired with building context and rules. The agent reasons over these to produce and iteratively revise construction code; the environment executes the code in Blender and the validator returns structured diagnostic feedback driving the next revision. 

any at causing structural regression is rejected even if S improves. 

3.3. Evaluation Metrics 

Structural Validity. This metric axis is binary: a structure either satisfies all tests in V or it does not. We deliberately avoid partial credit here. Physi-cal constraints are discontinuous by nature, a sin-gle unrestrained member or one over-spanned joist renders the assembly unsafe regardless of how well the rest is built, and a graded score would obscure this harshness. over all N evaluated structures per condition. 

Visual Fidelity. We measure pixel-level agree-ment between multi-view renders of the generated and target structures (Eq.(1)). Standard perceptual embeddings such as DINO or CLIP are ill-suited here: they are trained to be invariant to the geo-metric and positional differences that matter most Figure 5. Planner-Managed qualitative example AF-01-0060 (A-frame style). All three models begin from scratch and receive stepwise visual feedback toward the same target structure. Despite reaching a valid result at step 6, Gemini     

> and Claude employ markedly different construction strategies. Gemini pursues a top-down, shape-first approach: it approximates the overall silhouette early and refines toward it. Claude reasons bottom-up: it first establishes a struc-turally sound interior frame, then lays the roof rafters over it in the final step – a sequence closer to how a builder would physically construct an A-frame. GPT-5 fails to recognize the defining constraint of A-frame geometry, that the roof planes double as load-bearing walls, and from step 6 onward enters a false loop of adding conventional wall studs along the perimeter. Unable to escape this structural misconception, it exhausts all attempts without producing a valid result. This example highlights that identical visual feedback can elicit fundamentally different reasoning strategies, and that success depends not just on visual matching ability but on implicit architectural knowledge.

in construction (a wall shifted by 0.5 m looks se-mantically similar but is structurally wrong), and they provide no signal on missing or misplaced members that happen to fall outside the salient re-gion. We instead use alpha-weighted MSE. Let 

ˆRv and Rv be the rendered and target images of timber frames at view v, with union alpha mask 

mv = αgv ∪ αrv restricting comparison to non-transparent regions of either structure. The visual fidelity score is: 

S = 1

V

> V

X

> v=1

max 0, 1 − λ ·

P 

> p

mv (p) ev (p)

P 

> p

mv (p)

!

(1) averaged over V orthographic views. The union mask penalizes missing geometry, a member ab-sent in the generated structure leaves unmatched non-transparent pixels in the target without reward-ing empty background agreement. Visual fidelity is computed on structurally passed structures only. 

Topological Fidelity. Visual similarity can be gamed: a model that generates the correct silhou-ette but with wrong member counts, misplaced con-nections, or incorrect spatial hierarchy will score well visually while producing an unbuildable struc-ture (Eq.(2)). We therefore measure structural cor-respondence directly on the scene graph, indepen-dent of rendering, via three complementary statis-tics: Census accuracy C, Hungarian match rate M ,and Voxel IoU V .

C measures whether the model generates the cor-rect number of members per category. Let n∗

> k

and ˆnk be the ground-truth and generated member counts for category k ∈ { 1, . . . , K }; then C =

> 1
> K

P 

> k

min( n∗

> k

, ˆnk)/ max( n∗

> k

, ˆnk). This catches global over- or under-building even when individ-ual member positions look plausible, a failure mode that positional metrics miss. 

M measures whether individual members are placed at the correct spatial positions. Let σ∗ be the optimal assignment from the Hungarian algo-rithm between ground-truth and generated member centroids {ci} and {ˆcj }; then M = 1

> N

P 

> i

1[∥ci −

ˆcσ∗(i)∥ ≤ δ] where δ = 0 .3 m is the positional tol-erance, chosen to be permissive of minor placement error while rejecting members shifted by more than a stud spacing. M catches misalignment even when counts are correct, a failure mode C cannot detect. 

V measures volumetric overlap of the assembled structure. Let G and ˆG be the voxelized scene graphs at a fixed grid resolution; then V = |G ∩ 

ˆG| /|G ∪ ˆG| . V catches gross shape errors, e.g . miss-ing wings, wrong footprint extent, collapsed roof geometry that member-level statistics miss because they operate on individual centroids rather than the assembled volume. The composite score is: 

T = wC C+wM M +wV V, wC +wM +wV = 1 

(2) where wM > wC = wV , reflecting that posi-tional match is the most direct measure of assem-bly correctness, with count accuracy and volumet-ric overlap contributing equally as complementary diagnostics. Specific weight values are provided in Section 4. 

# 4. Experiments 

Models. We evaluate three frontier vision-language models: GPT-5 [37], Gemini 3 Flash [2], 

Claude Opus 4.5 [1]. All models use identical prompting with no fine-tuning. We abbreviate Claude Opus 4.5 and Gemini 3 Flash as Claude 

and Gemini respectively for brevity. 

Evaluation subset. We evaluate on a stratified sample of 1,200 structures per model-protocol cell, drawn uniformly across all 13 styles and 4 roof types, each structure represents a full agentic task: a multi-turn conversation of up to ∼50 API calls depending on protocol. Across three models and our three main protocols, this yields 21,600 inde-pendent agentic tasks and ∼200k API calls. To-ken consumption is correspondingly substantial, totalling approximately ∼5B tokens across the benchmark. This scale reflects the real computa-tional cost of evaluating frontier models on physi-cally grounded generative tasks. 

Details. Visual fidelity uses V = 5 ortho-graphic views (front, front-right, back, left, right) at 

512 ×512 with scale factor λ = 10 , mapping a 10% mean pixel error to S = 0 and passing threshold 

τ = 0 .6, which corresponds empirically to struc-tures visually recognizable as matching the target style and layout. Topological fidelity is computed with positional tolerance δ = 0 .3 m (permissive of minor placement error while rejecting members shifted by more than a stud spacing) and compos-ite weights wC = 0 .3, wM = 0 .4, wV = 0 .3,reflecting that positional match is the most direct measure of assembly correctness ( see Appendix for parameter choice ). Both visual and topological scores are computed on structurally passed struc-tures only; the joint pass rate J fraction satisfying 

V and S ≥ τ simultaneously serves as the primary scalar summary of overall generation quality. 

4.1. Main Results 

We evaluate each model under two input condi-tions: Frame , in which the model receives a bare timber framing image and must generate a struc-turally valid assembly, and Facade , in which the framing is occluded by finished exterior cladding and the model must infer the underlying structure from appearance alone. Intuitively, the Facade con-dition presents a more challenging task, as it re-quires the model to solve an inverse problem of hal-lucinating hidden, load-bearing topologies based solely on superficial exterior cues. Table 1 reports structural pass rates, visual and topological fidelity, and joint pass rates under three agentic generation tasks mentioned in 3.2. Results reveal four cross-cutting patterns that together characterize the cur-rent frontier of physically grounded generative rea-soning. We detail each observation O in turn. 

O1: Structural validity and visual fidelity are orthogonal. 

GPT-5 leads structurally in Planner-Atomic (79.2%) yet scores lowest visually Table 1. Consolidated Performance Metrics for GPT-5, Claude Opus 4.5, and Gemini 3 Flash. Frame = bare timber framing; Facade = finished exterior. Bold = best per column; shaded rows = best model per protocol by average across all conditions. Structural Pass Rate in [0 , 1] : passes only if all 16 validation tests clear. Visual Fidelity : average visual similarity score across 5 rendered views. Topological Fidelity : structural similarity across member counts, spatial alignment, and volumetric overlap. Joint Pass Rate in [0 , 1] : fraction satisfying both structural and visual criteria simultaneously. 

Model Protocol Structural Pass Rate Visual Fidelity Topological Fidelity Joint Pass Rate 

Frame Facade Frame Facade Frame Facade Frame Facade 

GPT-5 Planner-Atomic 0.792 0.637 0.312 0.287 0.143 0.151 0.035 0.019 Planner-Reactive 0.302 0.247 0.293 0.266 0.141 0.143 0.003 0.003 Planner-Managed 0.333 0.157 0.179 0.175 0.178 0.157 0.008 0.003 Claude Planner-Atomic 0.716 0.779 0.406 0.377 0.164 0.168 0.071 0.064 

Planner-Reactive 0.428 0.494 0.239 0.245 0.133 0.141 0.003 0.013 Planner-Managed 0.713 0.737 0.278 0.291 0.205 0.190 0.031 0.022 Gemini Planner-Atomic 0.454 0.539 0.376 0.394 0.171 0.170 0.031 0.036 Planner-Reactive 0.507 0.376 0.345 0.342 0.160 0.152 0.019 0.013 Planner-Managed 0.785 0.737 0.313 0.282 0.232 0.211 0.043 0.026 

Table 2. Iterative refinement with visual feedback. Each model starts from its Planner-Atomic structural passes and iterates up to 10 visual-feedback revisions. Baseline = oneshot output before revision; Final = last attempt; Best =highest-scoring attempt across all iterations. ∆ is Final −Baseline mean score. Improved Tasks = fraction of tasks that improved their visual fidelity score. Structures Retained = fraction retaining structural validity at the final attempt. Bold 

= best per column. 

Mean Visual Score Model Baseline Final Best ∆ % Improved Tasks Structures Retained 

Claude 0.408 0.441 0.461 +0.033 70.3% 68.5% GPT-5 0.392 0.405 0.425 +0.013 61.4% 78.1% 

Gemini 0.433 0.443 0.471 +0.010 56.1% 73.8% 

(0.312); Claude leads visually (0.406) but not structurally; Gemini leads structurally under Planner-Managed (78.5%) while remaining com-petitive visually (0.313). Models frequently satisfy validation by converging to a generic, physically safe assembly that ignores visual conditioning entirely. Physical validity is not a byproduct of visual imitation, and vice versa. 

O2: Structural reasoning is not a monolithic capability. 

Although GPT-5 leads structurally in Planner-Atomic (79.2%), it collapses under Planner-Managed (33.3%), dropping 46 points; Gemini reverses this entirely (45.4% → 78.5%), gaining 33 points; Claude is comparably protocol-stable (71.6% vs. 71.3%). We interpret this as two dis-tinct reasoning modes: holistic (e.g ., GPT-5 is strong single-pass synthesis, weak under incre-mental commitment) and Planner-Managed (e.g ., Gemini is strongest with phase decomposition and intermediate feedback). Planner-Reactive ex-periment confirms this: forcing models to self-decompose a structure into sequential steps with-out any external phase guidance is harder, as it de-mands both holistic planning and incremental com-mitment simultaneously. Figure 6. Iterative Refinement with Visual Feedback (Section 4.2, qualitative example BN-01-0273 (barn style). 

Starting from a structurally valid Planner-Atomic output, each model receives up to 10 rounds of side-by-side visual feedback (current render vs. target) and iteratively revises its structure while maintaining structural validity; steps 9–10 are omitted as changes from step 8 are negligible. Claude demonstrates meaningful visual self-correction: it produces a plausible roof (called: gambrel style) by step 2 but with an incorrect ridge orientation, then progressively corrects across subsequent steps, converging to the almost right form by step 8. GPT-5 commits to an incorrect orientation from step 1 and fails to recover, instead collapsing into a hybrid that blends both orientations without resolving either. Gemini 

makes minimal modifications across all 10 attempts, suggesting it does not meaningfully incorporate the visual feedback signal. This example illustrates the key behavioral divergence in this experiment: models differ not only in final score, but in whether they engage with feedback at all. 

O3: Some Models can see structure under the skin, some cannot. 

Claude and Gemini improve structurally under Facade input (Claude 71 .6% → 77 .9% ; Gem-ini 45 .4% → 53 .9% ); GPT-5 declines sharply (79 .2% → 63 .7% ). Gemini is the only model whose visual score also improves ( 0.376 → 0.394 ), suggesting it activates strong architectural priors when reasoning through appearance to infer under-lying structure. GPT-5, relying on direct structural mimicry, is disrupted when the framing signal is occluded by cladding. 

O4: Protocol dominates model. 

The performance gap attributable to protocol choice exceeds any cross-model difference within a fixed protocol. Gemini swings from 45.4% to 78.5% structural pass rate, a 33 points gain, sim-ply by changing from Planner-Atomic to Planner-Managed. Crucially, Gemini overtakes GPT-5 under Planner-Managed despite trailing it by 34 points under Planner-Atomic, a rank reversal im-possible to predict from single-protocol evaluation alone. This suggests that agentic scaffold design is at least as consequential as model selection: the same model can be the weakest or the strongest de-pending on how the task is structured. 

Other Observations. Topological proximity does not guarantee structural validity. Composite topological scores are nearly identical between passed and failed structures: in Planner-Atomic, passed vs. failed scores are 0.164 vs. 0.149 (Claude), 0.171 vs. 0.175 (Gemini), 0.143 vs. 0.131 (GPT-5); see Appendix for details . For Gemini, failed structures score higher topolog-ically than passing ones. Physical constraints are discontinuous , a single missed connection or an over-span fails the entire structure with no partial credit while topological and visual metrics are smooth and continuous. Because of this fundamental mismatch, standard perceptual benchmarks cannot be relied upon. They merely measure how accurate a structure looks overall, making them insufficient proxies for evaluating whether a model actually understands true physical generative reasoning. 

4.2. Iterative Refinement with Visual Feed-back 

Can iterative visual feedback improve similarity while maintaining structural validity? Starting from Planner-Atomic structural passes with Visual Fidelity S < 0.6 (see Appendix for reason ), we run up to 10 visual-feedback revisions with structural validation enforced at every step. Table 2 reports results. Structural retention at the final attempt is 68.5% for Claude, 73.8% for Gemini and 78.1% for GPT-5, confirming visual feedback does not catastroph-ically destabilize structural integrity. Visual scores improvement is moderate but consistent: Claude gains most (+0.033, 70.3% of Tasks improved); Gemini and GPT-5 gain less but still with more than half of the tasks’ visual score improved. 

# 5. Conclusion 

We introduced DreamHouse, a benchmark for 

physical generative reasoning in timber-frame con-struction. Evaluating four frontier VLMs reveals that structural validity and visual plausibility are or-thogonal signals. Models ranking similarly on stan-dard leaderboards diverge sharply here, yielding structural success rates from 15.7% to 79.2% and exhibiting qualitatively distinct failure modes. Cru-cially, performance is highly sensitive to the gener-ation protocol: a model’s assigned paradigm (holis-tic vs. stepwise) often impacts correctness more than the choice of model itself. This demonstrates that how a model is asked to reason about physical space matters as much as what it inherently knows. These results expose a gap in current evaluations: the ability to maintain global structural consistency, such as load-path continuity and code-compliant spans within complex real-world building systems. We hope DreamHouse and its validation suite serve as a concrete, verifiable target to track progress in this domain. 

Limitations and future work. High computational costs for executing validation scripts at scale cur-rently limit our evaluation to closed-source fron-tier models. Future work should extend our phys-ical constraint vocabulary to encompass concrete, steel, or multi-material assemblies. Furthermore, while we primarily evaluate the output generation pipeline, exploring the input end is vital, identi-fying visual representations, supervision signals, or training objectives that enable models to proac-tively internalize structural grammar rather than merely recovering it through iterative feedback. Appendix 

Appendix provides additional details on the dataset construction, evaluation protocol, model prompts, and extended experimental results that complement the main paper. 

# 6. Structural Validation Suite 

6.1. Load Path (Topological Connectivity) 

6.1.1. Setup 

Let S = ( V, E ) be an undirected graph where V =

{v1, . . . , v n} is the set of structural members and 

E is the adjacency relation. For each member vi,define its world-space axis-aligned bounding box (AABB): 

AABB i = [ x− 

> i

, x + 

> i

] × [y− 

> i

, y + 

> i

] × [z− 

> i

, z + 

> i

]

Definition 1 (Contact Relation) . Two members 

vi, v j ∈ V are adjacent , written vi ∼ vj , iff their AABBs overlap with tolerance ε = 0 .05 m, i.e. for each axis k ∈ { x, y, z } the true gap satisfies 

δk = max  0, max( a− 

> k

, b − 

> k

) − min( a+ 

> k

, b + 

> k

) ≤ ε. 

Definition 2 (Ground Set) . G = {vi ∈ V | z− 

> i

<

0.1 m}.

Definition 3 (Support Function) . σ : V → { 0, 1}

is the fixed point of: 

σ(vi) = 



1 vi ∈ G

1 ∃ vj ∼ vi, σ (vj ) = 1 0 otherwise computed iteratively until convergence. 

6.1.2. Test Criterion 

T1 = PASS ⇐⇒ σ(vi) = 1 ∀ vi ∈ V

6.2. Span Limits (IRC Compliance) 

6.2.1. Setup 

For each joist or rafter vi, let Li be the clear span, 

(wi, d i) the cross-section dimensions, and τ =0.03 the span tolerance. IRC look-up tables give allowable spans: 

TJ : ( wi, d i) 7 → L∗ 

> J

, TR : ( wi, d i) 7 → L∗

> R

.

6.2.2. Effective Span Reduction 

When purlins are present, rafter effective span is halved: 

Leff  

> i

=

(

Li/2 purlin present 

Li otherwise 

6.2.3. Test Criterion 

T2 = PASS ⇐⇒ 

(Li ≤ (1+ τ )L∗ 

> J

∀ vi ∈ Joists 

Leff  

> i

≤ (1+ τ )L∗ 

> R

∀ vi ∈ Rafters 

6.3. On-Centre Spacing (16"/24") 

6.3.1. Setup 

Group joists sharing the same elevation and di-rection into sets Gk. Sort each group by perpen-dicular position and form the spacing sequence 

sℓ = pℓ+1 − pℓ. Standard spacings: S =

{0.406 , 0.610 } m. 

Definition 4 (Compliant Spacing) . sℓ is compliant 

if min s∗∈S |sℓ − s∗| < 0.05 m. 

6.3.2. Test Criterion 

T3 = PASS ⇐⇒ ∀ G k, ℓ : sℓ compliant ∨ sℓ ≤ 0.1 m

6.4. Standard Lumber Dimensions 

6.4.1. Setup 

Let Λ be the standard nominal-dimension set (met-ric actual sizes, mm): 

Λ = {(38 , 89) , (38 , 140) , (38 , 184) ,

(38 , 235) , (38 , 286) , (89 , 89) , (140 , 140) }

For each framing member vi, let di =(min(∆ i), med(∆ i)) be its two smallest cross-section dimensions. 

6.4.2. Test Criterion 

T4 = PASS ⇐⇒ ∀ vi ∃ (w∗, d ∗) ∈ Λ : 

|di, 1 − w∗| < 10 mm 

∧ | di, 2 − d∗| < 20 mm 6.5. Deflection (L/360 Serviceability) 

6.5.1. Setup 

For each joist vi: uniform load w = 1900 N/m, 

E = 12 GPa, and Ii = bih3 

> i

/12 , where bi =min(∆ xi, ∆yi) and hi = ∆ zi. Mid-span deflec-tion and limit: 

δi = 5wL 4

> i

384 EI i

, δ∗ 

> i

= Li

360 .

6.5.2. Test Criterion 

T5 = PASS ⇐⇒ ∀ vi ∈ Joists : δi ≤ (1 + τδ ) δ∗

> i

where τδ = 0 .08 (8% deflection tolerance). 

6.6. Roof Coverage 

6.6.1. Setup 

Partition the footprint into 1 m × 1 m cells. Let F

be cells occupied by floor/sill objects, and R ⊆ F 

cells covered by at least one rafter projection (mar-gin μ = 0 .3 m). Coverage ratio: 

ρ = |R| / |F| .

6.6.2. Test Criterion 

T6 = PASS ⇐⇒ ρ ≥ 0.70 

6.7. Gap Detection 

6.7.1. Setup 

Using the grid from Test 6, the gap set is Q = F \R 

and the gap ratio γ = |Q| /|F| .

6.7.2. Test Criterion 

T7 = PASS ⇐⇒ γ ≤ 0.20 

Since ρ + γ = 1, T7 is equivalent to T6 at the same threshold; both are retained for diagnostic granularity. 

6.8. Cantilever Limits 

6.8.1. Setup 

Let P be ground-reaching supports ( z− 

> i

< 0.1 m). For each elevated sill s (z− 

> s

> 1.0 m), let ℓs be its length and Ps the nearby supports (within cmax =1.5 m laterally). For long sills ( ℓs > c sp = 3 .0 m), let ∆max  

> s

be the maximum gap between consecutive supports along the sill axis. 

6.8.2. Test Criterion 

T8 = PASS ⇐⇒ ∀ s ∈ ElevSills :

(|P s| ≥ 2 ∧ ∆max  

> s

≤ csp ℓs > c sp 

d(s, Ps) ≤ cmax otherwise 

6.9. Stability Score 

6.9.1. Definition 

The Topological Stability Index (TSI) is: 

Σ = 

P 

> vi∈V

σ(vi)

|V |

6.9.2. Test Criterion 

T9 = PASS ⇐⇒ Σ ≥ 1.0Σ = 1 .0 means every member’s load path termi-nates at a grounded element. T9 is strictly stronger than T1: T1 checks binary grounding; T9 requires the full set V to be grounded simultaneously. 

6.10. Dual-End Connection 

6.10.1. Setup 

For each rafter or stud vi with height hi = z+ 

> i

−

z− 

> i

≥ 0.3 m, define connection zones: 

Zbot  

> i

= [ z− 

> i

, z − 

> i

+ αh i], Ztop  

> i

= [ z+ 

> i

− αh i, z + 

> i

]

where α = 0 .20 .

Definition 5 (Zone Connection) . vj connects to zone Zbot  

> i

(resp. Ztop  

> i

) of vi if: (i) vj overlaps vi

in xy with tolerance εc = 0 .10 m, and (ii) [z− 

> j

, z + 

> j

]

intersects that zone with tolerance εc.

Let ϕbot  

> i

, ϕ top  

> i

∈ { 0, 1} indicate bottom/top zone connections. 

6.10.2. Test Criterion 

T10 = PASS ⇐⇒ ∀ vi ∈ Rafters ∪ Studs :

ϕbot  

> i

= 1 ∧ ϕtop  

> i

= 1 

A rafter missing its top connection (ridge/collar) has a free end and may rotate under load ( hinge fail-ure ). A stud missing its bottom connection (sole plate) is a floating column .Figure 7. Structural failure analysis across pipelines and models. (a) Per-structure failure rate for each of the 10 struc-tural validation tests, shown for the Planner-Atomic and Planner-Managedprotocols across all three models ( N = 1,200 per model for Planner-Atomic; N ≈ 1,160–1,197 for Planner-Managed, excluding Phase-0 failures). Each cell reports the percentage of structures for which that test failed at least once across all retry attempts. Values are independent marginal failure rates per test and do not sum to 100% per row, as a single structure can fail multiple tests simultane-ously. Bold column headers indicate the five dominant failure tests. (b) Co-failure pattern distribution: each structure is assigned to the exact set of tests it failed, ranked by frequency. Orange bars show Planner-Atomic( N = 3,551); blue bars show Planner-Managed( N = 3,484), each normalized to their respective totals. The top four Planner-Atomicpatterns share a Span + Deflection core, reflecting near-universal geometry violations. Planner-Managedfailures are dominated by Load + Stability errors, indicating structural connectivity issues rather than geometric ones. 

Figure 8. Typical failure modes of Claude 4.5 opus (Planner-Reactive). Each pair shows a ground-truth target struc-ture (left) alongside Claude’s generated output (right) for configurations RN_01_0035 (left pair) and AF_05_0713 

(right pair). Claude’s outputs exhibit two characteristic failure patterns: RN_01_0035 produces an overly sparse frame with missing members, while AF_05_0713 produces an overly dense packing of repeated elements. Both reflect insuf-ficient adherence to IRC structural rules, the model optimizes for visual plausibility rather than code-compliant member placement, resulting in structures that fail span limit and deflection validation despite appearing superficially similar to the target geometry. 

Summary Table 6.11. Level of Detail 350 and the Dream-House Validation Standard 

What LoD 350 Requires. The BIM Forum’s Level of Development specification defines Level of Detail 350 (LoD 350) as the threshold at which a model element is sufficiently detailed for con-struction coordination [10]. Concretely, LoD 350 requires that every structural member be modeled with: (i) Accurate geometry — cross-section dimen-sions matching nominal fabrication toler-ances ( ≤ 3 mm deviation from specifica-tion); (ii) Correct spatial position — no hard clashes, defined as two members occupying the same physical volume with overlap exceeding con-struction tolerance; (iii) Interface definition — each member must explicitly represent the connections and clearances needed by adjacent trades (e.g. Figure 9. Representative failure modes of Gemini-3-flash on A-frame structures under the Planner-Reactive protocol . Each pair shows the target structure (left) and the model output (right). Left pair AF_03_0392 : Gemini correctly identifies the A-frame geometry and rafter count but misplaces the side wing, attaching it to the wrong elevation face and inverting the attachment axis, producing a structure that passes visual inspection from one view but fails load-path and dual-end connection tests. Right pair AF_04_0460 : The ridge direction is rotated 90 ◦ relative to the target, causing all rafters to span the wrong axis; the resulting assembly passes geometric tests ( T3, T4) but fails roof coverage (T6) and gap detection ( T7) entirely. These errors illustrate a systematic failure mode: Gemini recovers what structural elements are present but not where they are oriented, consistent with O3: the model attends to member topology but not to the 3-D spatial relationships encoded in the multi-view input. 

Figure 10. Representative failure modes of GPT-5 on A-frame structures under the Planner-Reactive protocol. 

Each pair shows the target structure (left) and the model output (right). Left pair AF_02_0182 : GPT-5 reproduces the correct rafter count and overall A-frame silhouette but generates collar ties and floor joists that extend beyond the structure’s bounding envelope, with members protruding outside the intended footprint. The assembly fails dual-end connection ( T10 ) and gap detection ( T7) as a result. Right pair AF_03_0318 : A similar pattern: the rafter and joist layout is topologically correct but spatially unconstrained, members overshoot the ridge and sill attachment zones, leaving floating ends unconnected to the load path. Both failures share a common root cause: GPT-5 reasons about which 

members to place but not about the spatial envelope that bounds them, treating member generation as an independent local decision rather than a globally constrained packing problem. This geometric incapability, the inability to enforce that every member end terminates within a valid connection zone, is the dominant failure signature of GPT-5 across A-frame styles and is consistent with O2: structural reasoning is not monolithic, and spatial constraint satisfaction is a capability that does not co-occur with topological correctness. 

fastener zones, bearing seats); and (iv) Load-path integrity — the assembly must support a credible load transfer hierarchy from applied loads to the foundation without floating or unsupported members. Below LoD 350 (i.e. LoD 200–300), members may be represented as “placeholders” with approximate geometry; above it (LoD 400), full fabrication de-tailing is included. LoD 350 is therefore the min-imum standard for constructibility review and the natural target for automated structural generation. 

Mapping LoD 350 to Our 10-Test Battery. 

Each requirement above maps directly to one or Test Name Pass Condition Category                                                         

> T1Load Path σ(vi) = 1 ∀iIRC / Structural
> T2Span Limits Leff
> i≤(1 + τ)L∗IRC / Structural
> T3O.C. Spacing sℓ∈ S ± 0.05 mIRC / Geometric
> T4Std. Dimensions (wi, d i)∈ΛGeometric
> T5Deflection L/360 δi≤(1 + τδ)Li/360 Physics
> T6Roof Coverage ρ≥0.70 Geometric
> T7Gap Detection γ≤0.20 Geometric
> T8Cantilever Limits Support spacing ≤3.0mStructural
> T9Stability Score Σ = 1 .0Topological
> T10 Dual-End Connection ϕbot
> i=ϕtop
> i= 1 ∀iStructural

more tests in our validation suite (Table 3). Re-quirement (i) corresponds to T4 (standard lumber dimensions) and T2 (span limits, which implicitly enforce cross-section adequacy). Requirement (ii) is addressed by T7 (gap detection) and the clash de-tection module embedded in T9. Requirement (iii) is enforced by T10 (dual-end connection), which checks that every rafter and stud is restrained at both ends, the minimum condition for a mechan-ically complete interface. Requirement (iv) is cap-tured most directly by T1 (load path) and T9 (Topo-logical Stability Index), with T8 (cantilever limits) addressing the specific case of elevated sections that satisfy local connectivity but violate global load-path continuity. 

Why LoD 350 Is the Right Target for Physi-cal Generative Reasoning. Prior work on AI-assisted architectural generation has largely oper-ated at LoD 100–200, producing massing models or schematic floor plans that are visually plausible 

but not physically constructible [30, 36]. We argue that this constitutes a fundamental gap: a model that cannot satisfy LoD 350 constraints cannot rea-son about the physical world, only about its appear-ance. DreamHouse is specifically designed to close this gap. By grounding evaluation in LoD 350 cri-teria and operationalizing those criteria as formal, executable tests. We provide a benchmark at which the distinction between perceptual generation and 

physical generation becomes measurable. Concretely, passing all ten tests in our suite is a 

necessary (though not sufficient) condition for LoD 350 compliance in timber-frame residential con-struction. Sufficiency would additionally require fastener schedules, bearing plate sizing, and anchor bolt layouts (LoD 400 territory); we treat these as out of scope for the current benchmark but note them as a natural extension. 

# 7. Visual Similarity Metric and Score Choice 

We describe the full derivation of the visual simi-larity score S, justify the choice of alpha-weighted MSE over perceptual alternatives, and detail the view configuration used across all experiments. 

7.1. Score Derivation and Threshold Selec-tion 

7.1.1. Alpha-Weighted MSE Formulation. 

Let ˆRv ∈ [0 , 1] H×W ×3 be a rendered RGB im-age of a VLM-generated structure and Rv ∈

[0 , 1] H×W ×3 be the corresponding reference ren-der of the ground-truth structure, both produced from the same viewpoint v. Let mv = αgv ∪ αrv

be the union alpha mask of the generated and reference renders, restricting comparison to non-transparent regions of either structure. The alpha-weighted mean squared error is: Table 3. Mapping of LoD 350 constructibility requirements to the DreamHouse validation tests.                   

> LoD 350 Requirement Tests What Failure Means
> (i) Accurate geometry T4,T2,T5Non-standard cross-sections; spans exceeding IRC limits; serviceability failure under design load (ii) No hard clashes T7,T3Members overlap or leave gaps wider than one stud bay; framing cannot be physically assem-bled (iii) Interface definition T10 ,T6Rafters/studs free at one end (hinge failure un-der load); roof plane incompletely framed (iv) Load-path integrity T1,T9,T8Floating members; unsupported elevated sec-tions; Topological Stability Index <1.0

MSE v =

X

> p

mv (p) · ∥ ˆRv (p) − Rv (p)∥2

X

> p

mv (p)

where p indexes spatial pixels and the denomi-nator normalises by the foreground area. The union mask penalizes missing geometry: a member ab-sent in the generated structure leaves unmatched non-transparent pixels in the target without reward-ing empty background agreement. 

7.1.2. Per-View Score. 

The raw MSE is mapped to a bounded similarity score via a linear transformation calibrated so that 

MSE v = 0 gives Sv = 1 .0 (perfect match) and 

MSE v = 0 .1 gives Sv = 0 .0 (total failure): 

Sv = max  0, 1 − λ · MSE v



where λ = 10 . The linear form is intentional: it avoids the saturation behaviour of sigmoid-based mappings that would compress differences in the high-quality regime ( Sv > 0.8) where our bench-mark discriminates most finely between models. The aggregate visual similarity score reported in all tables is: 

S = 1

V

> V

X

> v=1

Sv

averaged over V = 5 views, consistent with Eq. (1) of the main paper. 

7.1.3. Joint Pass Condition Across Five Views. 

A single-view score is insufficient because a struc-ture may appear correct from the front while hav-ing a collapsed rear wall or missing roof section. We therefore require the score to exceed threshold 

τ on all five views simultaneously. Let Sv denote the per-view score for view v ∈ { 1, . . . , 5}. The binary visual pass indicator is: 

⊮vis =

> 5

Y

> v=1

1[Sv ≥ τ ]

7.1.4. Threshold Selection: τ = 0 .6.

The joint pass condition is strict by design: a struc-ture must exceed τ on every view simultaneously. We set τ = 0 .6 as the lowest threshold at which the joint pass rate remains non-trivially above zero across all models. Lower values admit structures with obvious structural failures while providing no discriminative signal, and the joint condition at any higher threshold collapses all models to near-zero pass rates. The τ = 0 .6 operating point thus repre-sents the most demanding threshold that keeps the benchmark informative across all evaluated mod-els. Table 4. Camera configuration for the five views. cv is the distance multiplier. View Azimuth Elevation cv               

> Front 0◦12 ◦1.05 Back 180 ◦12 ◦1.05 Left 270 ◦12 ◦1.05 Right 90 ◦12 ◦1.05 Front-right 45 ◦18 ◦1.10

7.2. Orthographic View Configuration 

7.2.1. View Definitions. 

All renders use perspective projection (focal length 32 mm) with camera distance scaled to the struc-ture’s bounding diagonal. The five canonical views are: 

7.2.2. Rationale for View Selection. 

The five views were chosen to provide complemen-tary coverage of the structure such that no single structural failure mode is invisible across all views: • Views 1–4 (cardinal elevations) detect wall mis-alignment, wrong storey height, missing or mis-placed openings, and incorrect roof pitch. • View 5 (front-right isometric) reveals three-dimensional failures: depth errors, missing rear framing, and roof asymmetries that are ambigu-ous in any single cardinal view. 

7.2.3. Distance Normalisation. 

For each view v, the camera is placed at distance 

dv = cv · D

where D = ∥pmax − pmin ∥2 is the world-space bounding diagonal of the structure and cv

is the per-view multiplier (Table 4). The camera always points at the structure’s bounding-box cen-troid b = ( pmax + pmin )/2.Scaling by D ensures that structures of different sizes, from 7 m × 7 m cottages to 14 m × 14 m two-storey colonials, always fill the frame comparably, without requiring a hard-coded minimum distance. Both the generated and reference renders use iden-tical camera parameters derived from their respec-tive bounding diagonals, so any residual scale dif-ference is absorbed by the fixed 512 × 512 resize applied before MSE computation. 

# 8. Bridge Benchmark: Motivating Ex-ample 

Prior to settling on timber-frame construction as the testbed for DreamHouse, we piloted a bridge-generation benchmark as an alternative domain for physical generative reasoning. The task asked fron-tier VLMs to generate a structurally valid truss or arch bridge given a reference render, outputting a BridgeParams dataclass that was then vali-dated against a 26-test suite (AASHTO LRFD [7], AISC 360 [8], ACI 318 [4]) and re-rendered for vi-sual comparison. On the surface, the domain ap-peared well-suited: the validation criteria are for-mally codified, the geometry is spatially unambigu-ous, and the renders are visually rich. 

The Shortcut. We observed that frontier VLMs could recover a near-perfect BridgeParams dict from a single reference image in one shot , requir-ing no iterative refinement. The outputs passed all validation tests and were visually indistinguish-able from the ground-truth renders. Closer inspec-tion revealed why: the render pipeline exposes a 

low-dimensional, analytically invertible parametric space. Concretely, the render script (bridge_render.py ) places the camera at a fixed distance d = c · L proportional to 

span_length L, always pointed at the cen-troid of the bounding box. The truss geometry is then a deterministic function of six scalar parameters: span_length , truss_height ,

num_panels , deck_width , chord_width ,and arch_rise , each of which projects to a directly measurable visual quantity in the render: apparent span-to-height ratio, panel count (a discrete integer legible from the image), deck-to-span width ratio, and so on. Furthermore, the validation tests themselves impose tight algebraic constraints that further reduce degrees of freedom: the span/depth ratio must lie in [7 , 11] (Test 1), the Figure 11. Representative renders from the bridge generation pilot: glulam Howe truss (left), steel Pratt truss (center-left), steel arch (center-right), and steel Warren truss (right). Each bridge is fully parameterized by a low-dimensional      

> BridgeParams dataclass whose scalar fields: span_length ,truss_height ,num_panels ,deck_width
> project directly to measurable visual quantities in the render. Frontier VLMs recovered valid parameters from a single reference image in one shot with no iterative refinement, exposing the domain as a visual measurement task rather than a test of structural reasoning. This failure mode motivated the shift to timber-frame construction, where the structurally critical quantities are interior to the assembly and not directly legible from exterior renders.

panel aspect ratio in [0 .65 , 1.40] (Test 6), the arch rise ratio in [0 .10 , 0.40] (Test 7). A model that can read two distances from an image and solve a pair of inequalities can satisfy these tests without any structural understanding. In short, the bridge benchmark collapsed into a visual measurement task : estimate a handful of lengths from the image, verify they satisfy publicly available code ratios, and instantiate the dataclass. No reasoning about member connectivity, load path topology, or construction hierarchy was required. 

Why Timber Framing Forecloses This Short-cut. Timber-frame residential construction lacks a low-dimensional parametric representation that is directly legible from exterior renders. The struc-turally critical quantities in DreamHouse: mem-ber spacing, connection zone assignment, load-path topology ( σ(vi) = 1 ∀i), dual-end restraint, and IRC span compliance are interior properties of the framing assembly that are partially or wholly oc-cluded in any single render. A wall shifted 0.5 m or a joist missing its end connection looks nearly identical from the outside but fails multiple valida-tion tests. No analytic inversion of the render exists because the mapping from framing topology to ex-terior appearance is many-to-one and non-injective: different assemblies produce indistinguishable ren-ders while differing in load path, cantilever ade-quacy, and structural stability. This is the key asymmetry between the two do-mains. Bridge geometry is exoskeletal the struc-tural members are the exterior, so visual similarity and structural correctness are tightly coupled. Tim-ber framing is endoskeletal , the structure is con-cealed behind cladding so the two are largely de-coupled. DreamHouse is specifically designed to exploit this decoupling: a model cannot achieve high structural pass rates by visual pattern match-ing alone, and the 7.1% joint pass rate observed across all frontier models (main paper, Table 2) confirms that the shortcut available in the bridge domain is not available here. 

# 9. Extended Experimental Results 

9.1. Stepwise with Per-Step Visual Feedback 

We evaluated a variant of Planner-Managed in which the rendered output is compared against the target after each construction step and visual sim-ilarity feedback is appended to the prompt before the next step. Table 5 reports structural pass rate, mean visual fidelity, and joint pass rate: the fraction of structures that simultaneously pass all structural tests and achieve S ≥ 0.6 for both conditions. 

Joint pass rate. Visual feedback more than doubles the joint pass rate for Claude ( +205% ,

3.08% → 9.40% ) and Gemini ( +105% , 4.34% →

8.90% ), while GPT-5 shows only a marginal im-provement ( +23% , 0.75% → 0.92% ). The joint metric is the most demanding criterion in our eval-uation. It requires the output to be simultane-ously safe and visually faithful and the large gains for Claude and Gemini indicate that per-step vi-Figure 12. Iterative Refinement with Visual Feedback trajectories for Claude 4.5 opus on four similar barn-style struc-tures. Each pair of rows shows the target (leftmost, lighter color) followed by successive iterations (left to right, darker). Dashed horizontal lines separate groups of structurally distinct targets. Within each group, targets share the same archi-tectural style and similar proportions, yet Claude consistently pursues different refinement strategies across instances: some trajectories make large structural revisions between iterations (roof skeleton replaced); others converge quickly and make only minor adjustments; others oscillate without monotonic improvement. This variability within a homogeneous style group reveals that Claude’s behavior is not driven by a stable visual error signal, it does not reliably identify the same class of discrepancy across similar targets and apply a consistent corrective action. Rather, each iteration represents an independent re-interpretation of the feedback, which can move the output toward or away from the target depending on which aspect of the render the model attends to. This is consistent with O1 and O3: visual similarity and structural validity are orthogonal, and the ability to see a structural error in a rendered image does not imply the ability to correct 

it in the next generation. 

sual grounding helps models resolve the orthogo- nality between structural validity and visual simi-Figure 13. The 13 architectural style archetypes visualized in Blender, shown as wireframe meshes in the 3D viewport. Each archetype defines the canonical massing, roof type, section layout, and story count for one style category in the DreamHouse dataset. The procedural generation pipeline instantiates each archetype across a range of lot sizes, proportions, and complexity levels to produce the 26,000+ structure dataset. Structures are rendered headless via the Blender Python API ( bpy ); the console output visible at the bottom shows a representative member placement call during procedural construction. 

larity identified in O1. 

Structural vs. visual trade-off. The two objec-tives do not always improve together under visual feedback. Claude gains on both axes: structural pass rate increases by +6 .67 percentage points and Visual Fidelity increases by +3 .7% . Gemini, how-ever, trades a small structural regression ( −4.45 pp) for a large visual gain: the fraction of structures passing S ≥ 0.6 nearly triples ( 5.4% → 13 .3% ). GPT-5 declines slightly on both axes, suggesting that visual feedback does not compensate for its underlying spatial constraint failures identified in Figure 10. 

Threshold crossing. The most obvious effect of vi-sual feedback is at the S ≥ 0.6 threshold: all three models show larger relative gains in visual pass rate than in Visual Fidelity, indicating that feedback helps a meaningful subset of structures cross the quality threshold even when the overall mean shifts little. This is consistent with visual feedback acting as a targeted correction signal rather than a uniform quality lift. 

9.2. Open-Source Model Evaluation 

We evaluated three open-source models under the Planner-Managed protocol to assess whether the capability gap observed between frontier models extends to publicly available weights. 

Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct and Qwen3-VL-30B-A3B-Instruct. Both models achieved a structural pass rate of 0% across all 10 validation tests under Planner-Managed. Neither model produced syntac-tically valid Blender Python code reliably enough to complete construction, and when code did exe-cute, the resulting assemblies failed every structural test. We did not collect visual similarity scores for these models as the structures were not renderable. 

Kimi K2.5. We additionally ran a small pilot evaluation of Kimi K2.5 under Planner-Managed on a random subset of structures and observed Table 5. Stepwise (Planner-Managed) without per-step visual feedback vs. with in Frame (timber framing as input). Joint pass rate is the primary metric: structures that are both structurally valid and visually similar ( S ≥ 0.6).                                 

> Model Protocol Struct. Pass Visual Fidelity Visual Pass ( ≥0.6) Joint Pass
> GPT-5 Planner-Managed 0.333 0.179 0.022 0.008 + visual feedback 0.317 0.173 0.030 0.009 Claude Planner-Managed 0.713 0.278 0.043 0.031 + visual feedback 0.780 0.288 0.122 0.094 Gemini Planner-Managed 0.785 0.313 0.054 0.043 + visual feedback 0.740 0.311 0.133 0.089

Figure 14. Representative outputs of Qwen3.5-397B-A17B under Planner-Managed, showing five target–output pairs across two views (front elevation, top; diagonal, bottom). Failures are more fundamental than those observed in frontier models: columns 1, 2, 4 show incorrect rafter orientation — rafters span the wrong axis entirely, producing a roof that is geometrically inverted relative to the target; column 3 exhibits severe global disproportion, with the generated structure roughly half the height and twice the footprint of the target, indicating a failure to infer absolute scale from the multi-view input; column 5 shows a collapsed depth dimension, the 3D volume is flattened into a near-planar assembly that passes a front-view silhouette check but has no structural depth. Unlike the frontier model failures in Figures 8 and 9, which involve spatially misplaced but topologically coherent members, Qwen3.5 errors reflect a lack of basic 3D spatial grounding, the model does not reliably recover the orientation, scale, or depth of the target structure from the provided views. 

a structural pass rate of 0%, consistent with the Qwen3-VL results. Given that three independent open-source model families: spanning dense and sparse MoE architectures, and parameter counts from 8B to 397B all failed to produce analyzable structural outputs, we discontinued the open-source evaluation track. The benchmark in its current form requires code generation and spatial reasoning ca-pabilities that appear to be frontier-only, and we leave open-source model improvement as future work. 

Qwen3.5-397B-A17B. We subsequently evalu-ated Qwen3.5-397B-A17B [3], a sparse mixture-of-experts model with 17B active parameters, ac-cessed via the Novita AI OpenAI-compatible end-point under the same Planner-Managed hyperpa-rameters used for frontier models (5 retries per step, 30 global retries, 5-step history truncation, τretry =0.4). Visual similarity checks were disabled for this run (require_visual_similarity: false ) as the model’s code reliability was uncer-tain. Out of 1,200 structures, 247 (20.6%) produced renderable outputs. The structural pass rate on this subset was 20.6%. Mean visual similarity was 

¯S = 0 .261 (median 0.220), well below all frontier models. Per-view scores were lowest for the back view ( S2 = 0 .167 ) and highest for the front-right diagonal ( S5 = 0 .418 ), consistent with the model producing a plausible front silhouette while failing to close the rear framing. Joint visual pass rates col-lapsed rapidly with threshold: 15.4% at S ≥ 0.3,10.1% at S ≥ 0.4, and 1.6% at S ≥ 0.6.These results confirm that the DreamHouse tasks remain out-of-reach for current open-source models even at the 397B scale, and that the bench-mark discriminates meaningfully between frontier and non-frontier capability levels. The 79.4% non-renderable rate for Qwen3.5 versus near-zero for GPT-5, Claude, and Gemini, further highlights that reliable Blender Python code generation is itself a frontier capability. 

9.3. Structural Error Map Visualizations 

Figure 7 provides a fine-grained breakdown of 

where models fail structurally, complementing the aggregate pass rates reported in the main paper. Panel (a) reports per-test marginal failure rates across the three protocolsPlanner-Atomic, Planner-Reactive) and Planner-Managed; panel (b) shows the distribution of co-failure patterns, the exact sets of tests that fail together on the same structure. 

Dominant failure modes differ by protocol (O4). 

Under Planner-Atomicprotocols, failures are con-centrated in the geometry cluster: Span Limits (T2), Deflection ( T5), and O.C. Spacing ( T3) ac-count for the majority of per-test failures, and the top co-failure patterns in panel (b) all share a Span + Deflection core. This reflects a system-atic tendency to generate members with plausi-ble proportions but incorrect absolute dimensions, the structure looks right but fails quantitative IRC limits. Under Stepwise, the failure profile shifts sharply toward the connectivity cluster: Load Path (T1) and Stability Score ( T9) dominate, with co-failure patterns driven by Load + Stability errors. This is consistent with O4 (protocol dominates model): the stepwise interface decomposes the task into member-by-member decisions that accumulate connectivity errors even when individual members are geometrically well-formed. 

Structural reasoning is not monolithic (O2). 

The per-test failure rates in panel (a) reveal that no model fails uniformly across all tests. Mod-els that perform well on geometric tests ( T3, T4)frequently fail load-path tests ( T1, T9), and vice versa. This decomposition supports O2: structural competence is multi-dimensional, and a model’s overall pass rate conflates distinct capabilities: di-mensional reasoning, topological connectivity, and IRC code compliance that need not co-occur. The five dominant failure tests (bold column headers in panel (a)) account for the large majority of all failures, suggesting that targeted improvement on a small subset of structural skills would dispropor-tionately raise the joint pass rate. 

Visual fidelity does not predict structural valid-ity (O1). The co-failure patterns in panel (b) re-veal that many structures with high visual simi-larity scores S nevertheless fail multiple structural tests simultaneously. The Span + Deflection co-failure pattern, the most common under Planner-Atomic produces renders that are visually near-identical to the ground truth (correct proportions, correct topology) while failing quantitative struc-tural criteria. This is the empirical basis for O1: visual similarity and structural validity are orthog-onal axes, and a benchmark that evaluates only S

would misclassify the majority of these failures as successes. 

Some models see structure under the skin (O3). 

Across both panels, Gemini shows a distinctively lower rate of Load Path ( T1) and Stability ( T9) fail-ures relative to GPT-5 and Claude under the Step-wise protocol, even though its geometric failure rates are comparable. This asymmetry, connectiv-ity competence without geometric precision, under-lies O3: it is better at maintaining grounded load paths member-by-member, even when individual member dimensions are imprecise. 

9.4. Additional Qualitative Results 

Figures 8, 9 and 10, show representative one-shot failures for Claude 4.5 opus, Gemini-3-flash and GPT-5 respectively. Figure 12 shows iterative refinement with visual feedback trajectories for Claude 4.5 opus across four similar barn-style structures, illustrating the high iteration-to-iteration variance in refinement strategy even within a homogeneous style group. 

# 10. Full Prompt Examples 

10.1. Prompt 0: Initial Generation Prompt 

Prompt 0 is the system-level instruction injected at the start of every Planner-Atomic and Planner-Managed pipeline call. It specifies the task, the Blender coordinate system, the structural member taxonomy, construction dependency rules, and the output JSON schema. The prompt is identical across all three models; only the five rendered view images and four scalar context fields ( lot_size ,

stories , roof_type , complexity ) are in-jected per sample. We present the prompt in four parts. 

Part 1: Task Definition and Building Context. 

The opening section states the task and injects per-sample metadata. The model is asked to pro-duce a structured JSON construction plan from five rendered views. Lot size, story count, roof type, and complexity are injected verbatim from the ground-truth record and must appear exactly in the model’s output (the validator rejects plans whose lot_size fields do not match to two dec-imal places).                                                                                         

> Prompt 0 — Part 1: Task Definition and Building Context
> #Timber Frame Construction Planning ## Your Task Create adetailed construction plan for the timber frame structure shown in the images. Your plan must specify: 1. Section decomposition 2. Construction phases (foundation -> floor -> walls -> roof) 3. Step-by-step build order with dependencies 4. Classification of each step as
> "safe" or "critical" 5. Member types and approximate counts for each step ## Building Context [injected per sample]
> -Lot Size: {width}m x{depth}m (area: {area}mˆ2) CRITICAL: Use EXACT values. Do NOT recalculate area. -Stories: {N} -Roof Type: {gable|hip|gambrel|shed} -Complexity: {simple|moderate|complex} ## Images Provided (5 views, in this exact order) Image 1: FRONT VIEW Image 2: BACK VIEW Image 3: LEFT VIEW Image 4: RIGHT VIEW Image 5: FRONT_RIGHT VIEW (diagonal)

Part 2: Coordinate System and View Defini-tions. The second section specifies the Blender world coordinate system and provides a per-view camera table so that the model can correctly in-terpret left/right/front/back directions when reading pixel-space measurements from each image. This is necessary because the back and right views are mirrored relative to the front view along the 

x-axis.                                                        

> Prompt 0 — Part 2: Coordinate System and View Definitions
> ## Blender Coordinate System +Z =up, +X =right, +Y =forward/front Axis mapping per view: -front :camera from -Y. X=left-right, Z=up-down -back :camera from +Y. X=right-left (mirrored), Z=up-down -left :camera from +X. Y=front-back, Z=up-down -right :camera from -X. Y=back-front (mirrored), Z=up-down

Section bounds use: - x_min/x_max : left-right extent - y_min/y_max : front-back extent (negative Y = back) - z_base : ground level (typically 0.0) ## How to Analyse Images Step 1 (Front): count roof peaks, note step-backs, measure widths. Step 2 (Sides): confirm depth, check height differences. Step 3 (Diagonal): verify 3-D section relationships. Step 4: cross-reference all views; use lot size as sanity check. Common section patterns: - Main body only : rectangular footprint, one roof - Main + side wing: L-shaped - Main + rear wing: T-shaped - Split-level : sections at different z_base values 

Part 3: Member Taxonomy and Naming Con-vention. The third section defines the complete set of valid member types, grouped by construc-tion phase, together with the naming convention en-forced by the validator. Any member whose name does not begin with one of the listed prefixes (case-sensitive) causes a validation failure and triggers a feedback loop. This section also states the canon-ical phase dependency chain (foundation → floor 

→ walls → roof) and provides typical spacing and dimension guidelines. 

Prompt 0 — Part 3: Member Taxonomy and Naming Convention 

## Structural Systems (build in this order) Foundation : Sill, BeamPost, Post Floor : Rim, Joist, CenterBeam Walls : SolePlate, TopPlate, Stud, GableStud, Header, King, Trimmer, Cripple Roof : Ridge, Rafter, Collar, Lookout, Purlin 

CRITICAL naming rule: member names must START WITH the prefix (case-sensitive). Valid: "Sill_front", "Joist_floor1_001" Invalid: "beam_001", "vertical_member", "roof_piece" Phase dependencies: - Foundation complete before floor - Floor complete before walls - Walls complete before roof - Multi-story: each story needs its own floor system Story 1 floor at z = 0.3m, Story 2at z = 3.0m, Story 3 at z = 5.7m Typical dimensions (guidelines, not strict): - Stud spacing : 0.4m (16") on centre - Joist spacing : 0.4m on centre - Rafter spacing : 0.6m on centre - Story height : 2.7m floor-to-floor Step classification: CRITICAL: phase transitions, new sections, elevated construction SAFE : adding parallel members (more joists, more studs) 

Part 4: Output JSON Schema. The final sec-tion specifies the exact JSON schema the model must produce. The validator parses this out-put and checks: (i) that lot_size fields match the injected values exactly; (ii) that all member-type strings match the taxonomy in Part 3; (iii) that depends_on indices form a valid directed acyclic graph (DAG) with no cycles; and (iv) that section bounds are consistent with the de-clared lot_size . A condensed excerpt of the schema is shown below; the full output includes 

expected_member_counts for all member types. 

Prompt 0 — Part 4: Output JSON Schema (excerpt) 

{"analysis": {"description": str, "stories": int, "sections": [str, ...], "roof_type": "gable|hip|gambrel|shed", "complexity": "simple|moderate|complex", "lot_size": { "width": float, "depth": float, "area": float } }, "sections": [{ "name": str, "bounds": {"x_min": float, "x_max": float, "y_min": float, "y_max": float, "z_base": float }, "stories": int, "systems": ["foundation","floor","walls","roof"], "dependencies": [str] }], "construction_order": [{ "step": int, "section": str, "phase":"foundation|floor|walls|roof", "step_type": "critical|safe", "members": [{ "type": str, "count": int }], "depends_on": [int] }], "expected_member_counts": {"Sill": int, "Joist": int, ... }}

10.2. API Hyperparameters 

Table 6 reports the API hyperparameters used for each model–protocol combination. All mod-els use temperature = 0.0 to ensure determin-istic outputs, except GPT-5 which does not ex-pose a temperature parameter. The three protocols correspond to Planner-Atomic (Planner-Atomic, one-shot), Planner-Reactive (Planner-Reactive, hy-brid cumulative), and Planner-Managed (Planner-Managed, stepwise). The iterative refinement with visual feedback pipeline uses the largest token bud-get (65,536) to accommodate full blend-file code revisions within a single API call. 

Max retries under Planner-Managed. The step-wise protocol applies two retry limits: up to 5 re-tries per step if the partial structure falls below 

τretry , and a global cap of 30 retries across all steps per structure. 

Context history. All three protocols maintain full conversation history during retries: each sub-sequent attempt receives all previous code out-puts and structural validation error messages. For Planner-Atomic and Planner-Reactive, this is man-aged implicitly by the chat client, which accumu-lates the full messages list across attempts. For Planner-Managed, history is managed by the IterationController , which exposes a 

conversation_history_steps parameter: Gemini retains the full construction transcript (999 steps), while GPT-5, Claude, and all other models truncate to the last 5 steps to prevent context over-flow from accumulating per-step code outputs. 

Render engine. The iterative refinement pipeline requires on-the-fly rendering at each feedback iter-ation; Cycles is used here to produce higher-fidelity images for the visual feedback signal. The visual similarity scores Sv reported across all protocols are also computed from Cycles renders to ensure a consistent comparison baseline. 

# 11. Benchmark Construction Details 

11.1. Blender Visualization 

Figure 13 shows the 13 architectural style archetypes visualized in the Blender 3D view-port, which serve as the canonical massing tem-plates for procedural dataset generation. The scene outliner for a representative ground-truth structure ( RN_01_0119 ) illustrates the taxonomy-compliant member naming convention enforced across all 26,000+ structures in the dataset. 

11.2. Compute Environment 

All dataset generation, structural validation, and rendering were performed using Blender 4.5.4 LTS (build hash b3efe983cc58 , commit 2025-10-27) with the Bonsai BIM add-on for IFC-level structural metadata handling. Both tools are freely available open-source software. Structural validation (the 10-test battery de-scribed in Section 7) is purely geometric and alge-braic, it operates on member bounding boxes and graph connectivity, and requires no GPU. VLM API calls are likewise CPU-bound on the client Table 6. API hyperparameters per model and protocol. τretry : visual similarity threshold below which the pipeline retries the current step or full generation. N/A : parameter not supported by the API. —: not applicable for this protocol.                                                                                            

> Protocol Model Temp. Max Tokens Max Retries τretry Context History Render Engine
> Planner-Atomic GPT-5 N/A 16,384 50.8 full -Planner-Atomic Gemini 0.0 16,384 50.8 full -Planner-Atomic Claude 0.0 16,384 50.8 full -Planner-Reactive GPT-5 N/A 64,000 10 0.6 full -Planner-Reactive Gemini 0.0 64,000 10 0.6 full -Planner-Reactive Claude 0.0 64,000 10 0.6 full -Planner-Managed GPT-5 N/A 16,384 5 / 30 0.4 full -Planner-Managed Gemini 0.0 16,384 5 / 30 0.4 full -Planner-Managed Claude 0.0 16,384 5 / 30 0.4 last 5 -Iter. Refinement GPT-5 N/A 65,536 10 0.6 full Cycles Iter. Refinement Gemini 0.0 65,536 10 0.6 full Cycles Iter. Refinement Claude 0.0 65,536 10 0.6 full Cycles

side. GPU resources are used exclusively for Cycles rendering during the iterative refinement pipeline, where on-the-fly photorealistic renders are required as visual feedback at each iteration. The pipeline is designed to be infrastructure-agnostic: the only hard dependency is a Blender installation accessible from the command line. No custom CUDA kernels, distributed training, or spe-cialised hardware are required to reproduce the benchmark. 

# References 

[1] Claude opus 4.5. 

https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-opus-4-5 , 2025. 2, 9 [2] Gemini 3 flash system card. 

https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/models/gemini-3-flash-preview , 2025. 2, 9 [3] Qwen3.5-397b-a17b release. 

https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3.5-397B-A17B , 2026. 23 [4] ACI Committee 318. Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete (ACI 318-19) and Com-mentary . American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills, MI, 2019. 19 [5] Arash Adel, Andreas Thoma, Matthias Helmre-ich, Fabio Gramazio, and Matthias Kohler. De-sign of robotically fabricated timber frame struc-tures. In 38th Annual Conference of the Associ-ation for Computer Aided Design in Architecture: Recalibration on Imprecision and Infidelity, ACA-DIA 2018 , pages 394–403. ACADIA, 2018. 4 [6] Hassan Abu Alhaija, Jose Alvarez, Maciej Bala, Tiffany Cai, Tianshi Cao, Liz Cha, Joshua Chen, Mike Chen, Francesco Ferroni, Sanja Fidler, et al. Cosmos-transfer1: Conditional world generation with adaptive multimodal control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14492 , 2025. 2, 3 [7] American Association of State Highway and Trans-portation Officials. LRFD Bridge Design Specifi-cations . AASHTO, Washington, DC, 9th edition, 2020. 19 [8] American Institute of Steel Construction. Specifica-tion for Structural Steel Buildings (ANSI/AISC 360-22) . AISC, Chicago, IL, 2022. 19 [9] Yizhak Ben-Shabat, Jonathan Paul, Eviatar Segev, Oren Shrout, and Stephen Gould. Ikea ego 3d dataset: Understanding furniture assembly actions from ego-view 3d point clouds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 4355–4364, 2024. 4 [10] BIM Forum. Level of Development (LOD) Spec-ification Guide and Reference , 2023. Accessed March 2026. 15 [11] Shiqi Chen, Tongyao Zhu, Ruochen Zhou, Jing-han Zhang, Siyang Gao, Juan Carlos Niebles, Mor Geva, Junxian He, Jiajun Wu, and Manling Li. Why is spatial reasoning hard for vlms? an atten-tion mechanism perspective on focus areas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01773 , 2025. 2 [12] Yanzhe Chen, Kevin Qinghong Lin, and Mike Zheng Shou. Code2video: A code-centric paradigm for educational video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01174 , 2025. 3 [13] Zhangquan Chen, Manyuan Zhang, Xinlei Yu, Xu-fang Luo, Mingze Sun, Zihao Pan, Yan Feng, Peng Pei, Xunliang Cai, and Ruqi Huang. Think with 3d: Geometric imagination grounded spa-tial reasoning from limited views. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.18632 , 2025. 2, 3 [14] Wei Chow, Jiageng Mao, Boyi Li, Daniel Seita, Vi-tor Guizilini, and Yue Wang. Physbench: Bench-marking and enhancing vision-language models for physical world understanding. In ICLR , 2025. 2, 3 [15] Building Code. International residential code. In-ternational Energy: Paris, France , 2018. 3, 4 [16] Jingtao Ding, Yunke Zhang, Yu Shang, Yuheng Zhang, Zefang Zong, Jie Feng, Yuan Yuan, Hongyuan Su, Nian Li, Nicholas Sukiennik, et al. Understanding world or predicting future? a com-prehensive survey of world models. ACM Comput-ing Surveys , 58(3):1–38, 2025. 2 [17] Anna C Doris, Md Ferdous Alam, Amin Heyrani Nobari, and Faez Ahmed. Cad-coder: An open-source vision-language model for computer-aided design code generation. In International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Con-ference , page V03AT03A031. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2025. 3 [18] Haoyi Duan, Hong-Xing Yu, Sirui Chen, Li Fei-Fei, and Jiajun Wu. Worldscore: A unified evalua-tion benchmark for world generation. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 27713–27724, 2025. 2, 3 [19] Chuan Fang, Heng Li, Yixun Liang, Jia Zheng, Yongsen Mao, Yuan Liu, Rui Tang, Zihan Zhou, and Ping Tan. Spatialgen: Layout-guided 3d in-door scene generation. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , 2026. 3 [20] Jiaxin Ge, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Xuhui Zhou, Yi-Hao Peng, Sanjay Subramanian, Qinyue Tan, Maarten Sap, Alane Suhr, Daniel Fried, Graham Neubig, et al. Autopresent: Designing structured visuals from scratch. In CVPR , pages 2902–2911, 2025. 4[21] Yunqi Gu, Ian Huang, Jihyeon Je, Guandao Yang, and Leonidas Guibas. Blendergym: benchmarking foundational model systems for graphics editing. In 

CVPR , pages 18574–18583, 2025. 3 [22] Roland Hess. Blender foundations: The essential guide to learning blender 2.5 . Routledge, 2013. 4 [23] Mengdi Jia, Zekun Qi, Shaochen Zhang, Wenyao Zhang, Xinqiang Yu, Jiawei He, He Wang, and Li Yi. Omnispatial: Towards comprehensive spatial reasoning benchmark for vision language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03135 , 2025. 3 [24] Lingdong Kong, Wesley Yang, Jianbiao Mei, Youquan Liu, Ao Liang, Dekai Zhu, Dongyue Lu, Wei Yin, Xiaotao Hu, Mingkai Jia, et al. 3d and 4d world modeling: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07996 , 2025. 2, 3 [25] Hyun Joo Kwon, Hyun-Jeong Lee, and Julia O Beamish. Us boomers’ lifestyle and residential preferences for later life. Journal of Asian Archi-tecture and Building Engineering , 15(2):255–262, 2016. 4 [26] Youngwoon Lee, Edward S Hu, and Joseph J Lim. Ikea furniture assembly environment for long-horizon complex manipulation tasks. In 2021 ieee international conference on robotics and automa-tion (icra) , pages 6343–6349. IEEE, 2021. 4 [27] Dacheng Li, Yunhao Fang, Yukang Chen, Shuo Yang, Shiyi Cao, Justin Wong, Michael Luo, Xi-aolong Wang, Hongxu Yin, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Worldmodelbench: Judging video gener-ation models as world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20694 , 2025. 3 [28] Ziyang Luo, Zhiqi Shen, Wenzhuo Yang, Zirui Zhao, Prathyusha Jwalapuram, Amrita Saha, Doyen Sahoo, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, and Junnan Li. Mcp-universe: Benchmarking large lan-guage models with real-world model context pro-tocol servers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14704 ,2025. 3 [29] José Marín, Tiffany MG Baptiste, Cristobal Rodero, Steven E Williams, Steven A Niederer, and Ignacio García-Fernández. Sciblend: Advanced data visualization workflows within blender. Com-puters & Graphics , 130:104264, 2025. 2 [30] Nelson Nauata, Kai-Hung Chang, Chin-Yi Cheng, Greg Mori, and Yasutaka Furukawa. House-GAN: Relational generative adversarial networks for graph-constrained house layout generation. In 

ECCV , 2020. 17 [31] Kun Ouyang, Yuanxin Liu, Haoning Wu, Yi Liu, Hao Zhou, Jie Zhou, Fandong Meng, and Xu Sun. Spacer: Reinforcing mllms in video spatial reason-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.01805 , 2025. 2 [32] Zhenyu Pan and Han Liu. Metaspatial: Reinforc-ing 3d spatial reasoning in vlms for the metaverse. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18470 , 2025. 2 [33] Ye Peng, Ming Lu, and Ali Imanpour. Analysis of the rationality of extending lod standards from the design phase to the production and construction phases. In International Conference on Computing in Civil and Building Engineering , pages 314–324. Springer, 2024. 4 [34] Ava Pun, Kangle Deng, Ruixuan Liu, Deva Ra-manan, Changliu Liu, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Generat-ing physically stable and buildable brick structures from text. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision , pages 14798–14809, 2025. 3, 4 [35] Fedor Rodionov, Abdelrahman Eldesokey, Michael Birsak, John Femiani, Bernard Ghanem, and Pe-ter Wonka. Floorplanqa: A benchmark for spatial reasoning in llms using structured representations. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07644 , 2025. 2, 3 [36] Mohammad Amin Shabani, Sepidehsadat Hosseini, and Yasutaka Furukawa. HouseDiffusion: Vector floorplan generation via a diffusion model with dis-crete and continuous denoising. In CVPR , 2023. 17 [37] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al. Openai gpt-5 sys-tem card. https://cdn.openai.com/gpt-5-system-card.pdf , 2025. 2, 9 [38] Ilias Stogiannidis, Steven McDonagh, and Sotirios A Tsaftaris. Mind the gap: Benchmarking spatial reasoning in vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19707 , 2025. 2 [39] Qiushi Sun, Jingyang Gong, Yang Liu, Qiaosheng Chen, Lei Li, Kai Chen, Qipeng Guo, Ben Kao, and Fei Yuan. Januscoder: Towards a founda-tional visual-programmatic interface for code intel-ligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23538 , 2025. 3 [40] Jiahao Tang, Henry Hengyuan Zhao, Lijian Wu, Yifei Tao, Dongxing Mao, Yang Wan, Jingru Tan, Min Zeng, Min Li, and Alex Jinpeng Wang. From charts to code: A hierarchical benchmark for mul-timodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17932 ,2025. 3, 4 [41] Kexian Tang, Junyao Gao, Yanhong Zeng, Haodong Duan, Yanan Sun, Zhening Xing, Wenran Liu, Kaifeng Lyu, and Kai Chen. Lego-puzzles: How good are mllms at multi-step spatial reason-ing? arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19990 , 2025. 2 [42] HunyuanWorld Team, Zhenwei Wang, Yuhao Liu, Junta Wu, Zixiao Gu, Haoyuan Wang, Xuhui Zuo, Tianyu Huang, Wenhuan Li, Sheng Zhang, et al. Hunyuanworld 1.0: Generating immersive, ex-plorable, and interactive 3d worlds from words or pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21809 , 2025. 2, 3[43] Ruocheng Wang, Yunzhi Zhang, Jiayuan Mao, Ran Zhang, Chin-Yi Cheng, and Jiajun Wu. Ikea-manual: Seeing shape assembly step by step. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:28428–28440, 2022. 4 [44] Xinjie Wang, Liu Liu, Yu Cao, Ruiqi Wu, Wenkang Qin, Dehui Wang, Wei Sui, and Zhizhong Su. Em-bodiedgen: Towards a generative 3d world en-gine for embodied intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10600 , 2025. 2, 3 [45] Junfei Wu, Jian Guan, Kaituo Feng, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, Liang Wang, Wei Wu, and Tieniu Tan. Rein-forcing spatial reasoning in vision-language models with interwoven thinking and visual drawing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09965 , 2025. 2 [46] Bo Xia, Tim O’Neill, Jian Zuo, Martin Skitmore, and Qing Chen. Perceived obstacles to multi-storey timber-frame construction: an australian study. Ar-chitectural science review , 57(3):169–176, 2014. 4 [47] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. In CVPR ,pages 21469–21480, 2025. 3 [48] Jihan Yang, Shusheng Yang, Anjali W Gupta, Ri-lyn Han, Li Fei-Fei, and Saining Xie. Thinking in space: How multimodal large language models see, remember, and recall spaces. In CVPR , pages 10632–10643, 2025. 3 [49] Weirui Ye, Fangchen Liu, Zheng Ding, Yang Gao, Oleh Rybkin, and Pieter Abbeel. Video2policy: Scaling up manipulation tasks in simula-tion through internet videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09886 , 2025. 4 [50] Guang Yin, Yitong Li, Yixuan Wang, Dale Mc-Conachie, Paarth Shah, Kunimatsu Hashimoto, Huan Zhang, Katherine Liu, and Yunzhu Li. Codediffuser: Attention-enhanced diffusion policy via vlm-generated code for instruction ambiguity. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16652 , 2025. 3 [51] Shaofeng Yin, Jiaxin Ge, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Xi-uyu Li, Michael J Black, Trevor Darrell, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Haiwen Feng. Vision-as-inverse-graphics agent via interleaved multimodal reason-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11109 , 2026. 3 [52] Jirong Zha, Yuxuan Fan, Xiao Yang, Chen Gao, and Xinlei Chen. How to enable llm with 3d capacity? a survey of spatial reasoning in llm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05786 , 2025. 2 [53] Weichen Zhang, Zile Zhou, Xin Zeng, Xuchen Liu, Jianjie Fang, Chen Gao, Yong Li, Jinqiang Cui, Xinlei Chen, and Xiao-Ping Zhang. Open3d-vqa: A benchmark for comprehensive spatial reason-ing with multimodal large language model in open space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11094 , 2025. 2, 3[54] Yifan Zhang, Chunli Peng, Boyang Wang, Puyi Wang, Qingcheng Zhu, Fei Kang, Biao Jiang, Ze-dong Gao, Eric Li, Yang Liu, et al. Matrix-game: Interactive world foundation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18701 , 2025. 3 [55] Zhengxue Zhou, Satheeshkumar Veeramani, Hatem Fakhruldeen, Seda Uyanik, and Andrew I Cooper. Genco: A dual vlm generate-correct framework for adaptive peg-in-hole robotics. In 

2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 16744–16751. IEEE, 2025. 3