Title: Architectural Obsolescence of Unhardened Agentic-AI Runtimes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01740v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:01:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Architectural Obsolescence of Unhardened Agentic-AI Runtimes 

A production-CLI in-vivo comparison of OpenClaw and enclawed-oss on F1–F4 detection, extension parity, and improvability Alfredo Metere Metere Consulting, LLC. 

alfredo.metere@metereconsulting.com 

May 2, 2026 

Abstract 

An agentic-AI runtime issues tool calls, sends messages, and actuates devices on behalf of an LLM. Catching the four ways an action can diverge from its audit record — F1 gate-bypass, F2 audit-forgery, F3 silent host failure, F4 wrong-target [1] §5 — is a load-bearing safety property of any such runtime. We show that upstream OpenClaw, the most en-gineered single-user agentic-AI gateway in public release, catches none of them: recall is 0.000 on every cell of every confusion matrix, on a 1600-sample template baseline through OpenClaw’s actual production command-line interface (CLI) and on a ten-LLM cross-model generalisation run. Detecting F1–F4 requires seven specific runtime structures absent from OpenClaw’s source tree : a biconditional checker, a hash-chained audit log, an extension admission gate, a two-layer egress guard, a Bell-LaPadula classification policy, a module-signing trust root, and a bootstrap seal. enclawed-oss — an MIT-licensed drop-in fork that ships all seven — reaches P = R = F1 = accuracy = 1 .000 on the same input. The gap is structural, not parametric: a six-line append-only widening of enclawed-oss’s data-loss-prevention (DLP) regex catalog raises per-channel F3 detection by 14.6% net at unchanged precision; the same edit on OpenClaw has nowhere to land. The harness deliberately exercises real Discord and Telegram channels — plugin categories the first enclawed release deleted as unsafe — to show F1–F4 detection extends to those previously-unsafe extensions. With architectural superiority for security and feature parity for extensions (§1, contributions), we argue that unhardened agentic-AI runtimes are architecturally obsolete: a strictly better alternative exists, is adoptable today, and the gap requires re-architecture rather than configuration. We invite reviewers to apply the harness to any candidate runtime. 

# 1 Introduction 

Obsolescence is a comparative property. A tool is obsolete with respect to a use case when a strictly better alternative exists, the alternative is adoptable by current operators of the tool, and the gap between them is wide enough that staying on the tool no longer reflects a defensible choice. Obsolescence is therefore not a property of the deprecated tool alone; it is a property of the gap between the deprecated tool and the available alternative, relative to a specific use case the alternative serves better. This paper makes a claim of that shape about agentic-AI runtimes. Upstream OpenClaw [2] and the broader unhardened-agentic-AI runtime category it exemplifies are obsolete with respect to the four biconditional failure modes F1–F4 of [1] §5 (gate-bypass, audit-forgery, silent host failure, wrong-target) because a strictly better alternative — enclawed-oss — exists, is MIT-licensed and drop-in adoptable, and the gap is structural rather than parametric. Detecting 1

> arXiv:2605.01740v1 [cs.CR] 3 May 2026

F1–F4 requires a vocabulary of seven primitives (Table 2): a biconditional checker, a hash-chained audit log, an extension admission gate, a two-layer egress guard, a Bell-LaPadula classification policy lattice, a module-signing trust root, and a bootstrap seal. The four are the attack shapes ; the seven are the runtime structures needed to detect them. We mediate 1600 adversarial-and-legit chat samples through OpenClaw’s actual production CLI and through two hardened forks. OpenClaw recall is 0.000 on every F1–F4 category; both hardened subjects reach P = R = accuracy = 1 .000 . A tree-walk of OpenClaw’s 14,419 first-party source files returns zero matches for any of the seven primitives; those same primitives are shipped in enclawed-oss. The gap between 0% and 100% is not a flag, a configuration knob, or a plug-in; it is the seven primitives. 

Definition (architectural obsolescence). A runtime category R is architecturally obsolete 

with respect to a failure-mode set F iff there exists an alternative runtime A / ∈ R such that: 1. Strict dominance. An end-to-end adversarial harness reports recall = 0 for every R ∈ R 

on every mode in F, while A reports recall = 1 (or materially higher than every R) at the same or better precision. 2. Practical adoptability. A is available to any operator who currently runs R: open-source license, drop-in fork, no new infrastructure, no cost barrier. 3. Structural gap. A tree-walk over R’s first-party source returns zero matches for any primitive in the detection vocabulary P(F) that A ships; closing the gap to A’s recall requires the joint addition of P(F), i.e. a re-architecture, not a parameter, a flag, or a plug-in. Condition (1) is the gap; (2) is what makes the gap operationally relevant (a strictly better alternative that no one can adopt does not obsolete the incumbent); (3) distinguishes obsolete 

from weak — a runtime catching 60% of F1 has a tunable detector and is weak; a runtime catching 0% with no detector in the source tree is obsolete relative to one that catches 100% via primitives the first does not have. We do not claim the seven primitives are the unique decomposition: a different decomposition that achieves the same recall would equally support the claim for any runtime that ships it. The empirical contribution of this paper is to exhibit such a pair — the unhardened-agentic-AI runtime category R, with upstream OpenClaw as the 

strongest measured representative , and the alternative A = enclawed-oss — and to verify all three conditions for them. Choosing the strongest representative is deliberate: weaker members of R score ≤ OpenClaw’s score by inheritance and require no separate measurement. 

Stakes. PCI DSS 10.x, SOC 2 CC7.2, HIPAA 164.312(b), FedRAMP AU-2, NIST 800-53 AU-9, and GDPR Art. 30 all require tamper-evident audit of every consequential decision; a runtime that emits no audit on F1 satisfies none of them. enclawed-oss’s core architecture is ready for Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 140-3 (the crypto-fips module gates symmetric encryption behind assertFipsMode , signed manifests use Ed25519 per FIPS 186-5, and the enclaved flavor asserts FIPS at boot) and the framework’s control families align with NIST 800-53, ISO/IEC 27001/27002, NIST CSF 2.0, SOC 2, GDPR, HIPAA, PCI DSS v4, CMMC L2/L3 / NIST 800-171, and CNSSI 1253; upstream OpenClaw aligns with none of them by inspection. The empirical incidence record agrees: Broken Access Control (the F1 surface) is OWASP Top 10:2021’s most prevalent vulnerability class, present in 94% of tested applications [8]; trustworthy internal detection shortens the breach lifecycle by 61 days on average [9]; Mandiant M-Trends 2024 reports global median dwell time at 10 days , down from 16, as internal detection rises from 37% to 46% [10]. For deployments that actuate physical devices the obsolescence is also a safety property: “no detection mechanism exists” is no longer a tenable default once the loop reaches a robot, a CNC mill, or an irrigation valve. 2Coverage scope. enclawed-oss’s defences are application-level and complete on two surfaces: the structural surface F1–F4 (biconditional over hash-chained audit) and the content surface (se-crets, personally identifiable information (PII), prompt injection via DLP and prompt-shield ). Out of scope are system-level software attacks (time-of-check-to-time-of-use (TOCTOU) on the corpus snapshot, side-channel timing, crypto-primitive attacks, operator collusion; addressed by process isolation, write-once-read-many (WORM) audit storage, FIPS-validated crypto, and separation of duty) and application-level attacks outside F1–F4 (information-flow control for paraphrase exfiltration, semantic intent verification, indirect injection through ungated tool-output channels; future work). The obsolescence claim is therefore scoped exactly: enclawed-oss is fully safe from the application-level software-only attack classes the F1–F4 contract names; OpenClaw is safe from none of them. 

Extension parity, including the previously-unsafe set (new in this paper). The first enclawed paper [1] introduced the F1–F4 primitives but shipped with a reduced extension set in the high-trust enclaved flavor: 78 cloud-channel and cloud-LLM modules (Discord, Telegram, Slack, OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, . . . ) were deleted as unsafe under that flavor’s threat model. The present work closes the gap on two coupled axes: (1) the OSS open flavor now ships every one of OpenClaw’s 125 bundled extensions plus an added Model Context Protocol (MCP) attestation reference module (126 total); (2) the harness exercises real Discord and Telegram channels — precisely the plugin categories the first enclawed release deleted — and reports recall = 1.000 on every F-category, demonstrating that F1–F4 detection secures the exact previously-unsafe plugin classes. With architectural superiority for security and feature parity that extends to those plugins, no remaining deployment constraint motivates choosing upstream OpenClaw over enclawed-oss. 

Contributions. 

• A falsifiable definition of architectural obsolescence (above) and a non-empty witness category for it (§7). 

• A reproducible adversarial harness that runs upstream OpenClaw end-to-end through its production CLI and exercises all three subjects on real Discord and Telegram bot endpoints (§5, §4). 

• Empirical results on two complementary distributions — in-distribution templates ( n =1600 headline, n = 80 ,000 stress) and ten-LLM cross-model generalisation (§6). 

• Empirical extension parity between enclawed-oss and upstream OpenClaw (126 vs. 125 bundled extensions; open flavor), a property absent from the first enclawed paper that is required for the obsolescence claim to bind in practice. 

• A live demonstration that the F1–F4 gate is improvable on the hardened category and structurally not on the obsolete category: a six-line append-only widening of the produc-tion DLP catalog raises per-channel F3 TP counts by 14.6% net at unchanged precision (§6.2.3). 

# 2 The F1–F4 failure-mode taxonomy 

The obsolescence claim rests on a specific failure-mode set F inherited from [1] §5. We restate it briefly so the rest of the paper is self-contained. 32.1 Intuition 

Two things happen for every consequential agent action: the action mutates the world (the 

corpus delta D) and the agent writes a hash-chained audit record describing it (the audit log 

S). A correct agent keeps them in lockstep: every real mutation has exactly one successful audit record, and vice versa. The four ways they can diverge are F1–F4: 

• F1 (gate bypass) — mutation in D, no matching record in S. The agent moved state without going through the admission gate. 

• F2 (audit forgery) — record in S, no matching mutation in D. The audit log is being used to fabricate evidence of work that never happened. 

• F3 (approved-but-failed silent) — mutation partially landed but the audit record is 

ok=false (so excluded from S); the residue projects as F1. 

• F4 (wrong target) — the gate approved (cap , targetA ) but the corpus mutation landed on (cap , targetB ).The biconditional check is a multiset diff on (cap , target ) keys; ordering, timing, and content do not enter it. F1, F2, F4 manifest as named diffs with the offending key reported; F3 collapses to the F1 shape. Modes that do not cause D̸ = S — read-only exfiltration, TOCTOU races that finish before the diff reads, collusion with a privileged operator whose actions are correctly logged — are out of scope by construction; §8.2 returns to them. 

2.2 Formal statement 

We give the F1–F4 contract precise mathematical form. Let C be the enclawed capability vocabulary (a fixed finite set; nine tokens in v1, including net.egress , fs.read , tool.invoke , publish ,

pay ). Let T be the universe of canonical target identifiers (channel URIs, file paths, host URLs). A corpus delta is a multiset D ∈ NC×T recording, for each (capability, target) pair, the count of real-world mutations the agent caused. An audit log is a sequence of records 

L = (r1, r 2, . . . ) each of which carries a type τi, a payload ρi, and a hash-chain field 

hi = SHA -256 (hi−1 ∥ canon (ri)) . The audit-side multiset S ∈ NC×T is the projection 

S = π(cap ,tgt )

> (

{r ∈ L : τ (r) = irreversible.executed ∧ ρ(r).ok = true }), (1) i.e., we keep only the audit records that claim a successful irreversible operation, and project them onto the (capability, target) key. Records marked ok = false (silent failures) are deliber-ately excluded from S; they survive in L for forensics but do not count toward the reconciliation. The biconditional check compares D and S:

check (D, S ) = 

> 

ok if D = S as multisets, 

f1Bypass( D \ S) if D ⊋ S, 

f2Forgery( S \ D) if S ⊋ D, 

f4WrongTarget( D \ S, S \ D) if D̸ = S and neither contains the other. (2) F3 (silent host failure) collapses to the F1 case at the multiset level: a half-finished operation contributes to D but its ok = false audit record is excluded from S, so D \S becomes non-empty. The biconditional check from [1] §5 compares a corpus-delta multiset D against an audit-log multiset S, both keyed by the projection (cap , target ), where cap is a capability token from the enclawed vocabulary and target is the canonical target identifier of the operation. The four failure modes manifest as divergences between the two multisets: 4Mode Definition Detection mechanism F1 gate bypass D \ S̸ = ∅ Corpus delta exists with no matching                                                     

> irreversible.executed audit record where
> ok=true . The agent (or an attacker controlling the agent) mutated state without going through the admission gate.
> F2 audit forgery
> S\D̸=∅Audit record claims irreversible.executed with
> ok=true but the corpus shows no matching muta-tion. The audit log is being used to fabricate evi-dence of work that never happened.
> F3 approved-but-failed silent
> D\S̸=∅Gate approved the call; host began executing it; failed silently mid-operation. The audit record ex-ists with ok=false (excluded from S) so the partial corpus mutation projects as F1.
> F4 wrong tar-get
> D\S̸=∅and S\D̸=∅Gate approved (cap ,targetA )but corpus mutated
> (cap ,targetB ).Because the projection key includes target, the audit’s (cap ,targetA )and the corpus’s
> (cap ,targetB )land in different multiset buckets.

Table 1: The four biconditional failure modes (paper §5). A runtime detects the failure modes if and only if it carries (1) an audit log that records each (cap , target ) pair the gate approved, (2) a corpus-delta source the runtime can canonicalize against the same projection, and (3) a checker that compares the two multisets. None of those three primitives exists in upstream OpenClaw. 

# 3 Threat model 

Adversary capability. The adversary controls any string the agent’s host runtime pro-cesses — chat message, retrieved-document chunk, tool-output payload, operator prompt — including content that imitates LLM serialisation tokens, embeds known secret/PII shapes, or mis-matches the intended target. The adversary may not compromise the host process, the trust root, the audit-log filesystem, or the cryptographic primitives; those are addressed by system-level orthogonal controls (process isolation, FIPS-validated crypto, WORM storage). 

Knowledge. White-box: read access to all subject source trees, including the gate stack, the regex catalogs, and the F1–F4 contract verbatim. Stronger than black-box; consistent with any defence-in-depth claim that does not lean on obscurity. Out of scope , per [1] §5.4: read-only exfiltration that does not cause D̸ = S, TOCTOU races on the corpus, operator collusion with full corpus access, side-channel timing extraction, and direct crypto-primitive attacks. A gate detection rate of 1.000 on F1–F4 does not imply 1.000 on these. 

# 4 The three subjects 

The harness mediates every sample through three runtimes drawn from the same lineage. They differ in exactly the seven detection primitives F1–F4 require (Table 2). 

OpenClaw (upstream). The single-user agentic-AI gateway by Steinberger [2], taken throughout this paper as the strongest representative of the unhardened-agentic-AI runtime class: the most engineered, most adopted, and most feature-complete single-user agentic-AI gateway in public release. Permissive defaults: external channels, external LLM providers, plug-in modules installed via npm with no enforced signature verification. Audit, classification, and DLP are not part of the framework’s contract. The harness exercises upstream OpenClaw 5by invoking the actual upstream CLI per sample , not as a probe or a shim: each per-sample me-diation spawns node openclaw.mjs message send –channel <discord|telegram> –target <id> –message <content> –dry-run –json against an upstream checkout that has been built with pnpm install && pnpm build:docker , captures the JSON envelope upstream emits, and records the verdict the runtime itself reports. –dry-run stops upstream’s pipeline at the network-call boundary so no real Discord/Telegram message is transmitted, but every other code path is the same code path a production end-user invocation exercises (CLI argv parsing → message-send command handler → channel resolution → payload framing →

outbound delivery decision). A successful delivery decision (envelope shape action=send ,

payload populated, handledBy non-empty, no error field) is the verdict the harness records as delivered = true for that sample; any error or rejection at any step in upstream’s pipeline is the runtime’s actual content-gate verdict. Every per-sample OpenClaw verdict in this paper is the verdict upstream’s runtime emits when its own code path runs end-to-end. 

enclawed-oss. An MIT-licensed, independently re-engineered divergent hard fork of Open-Claw [1]. Adds a hash-chained audit log, a Bell-LaPadula classification lattice, an Ed25519 module-signing trust root, an extension admission gate (signed manifest, declared capabilities, biconditional admission for net-capable extensions), a two-layer egress guard (fetch wrapper plus 

Socket.prototype.connect guard) with VPN-only mode, a structural prompt shield, and a regex-based DLP scanner. Every shipped extension is admitted under the same gate. 

enclawed-enclaved. The proprietary certification layer. Inherits everything enclawed-oss provides and adds, at the framework contract level: (i) a fail-closed admission contract — if the external-witness component is not engaged at boot, the runtime refuses to admit any extension for the rest of the run; (ii) externally-witnessed audit — every gate decision carries an Ed25519-signed witness record that an independent third party can re-verify with only the witness’s public key; (iii) a behavioral-anomaly monitor sitting alongside the content-gate stack so that abnormal action patterns are flagged in addition to abnormal content; (iv) tamper-attempt accounting in the audit log distinct from regular policy denials. Internal architecture is out of scope for this paper. 

4.1 Empirical primitive availability 

Table 2 reports the result of a two-stage audit of each subject’s published surface. First, a tree-walk over the first-party source files ( *.ts , *.tsx , *.mjs , *.js , *.cjs ; node_modules , dist ,

build , out , coverage excluded) greps for the canonical exported symbol of each detection primitive. Second, the subject’s user-facing documentation, plugin SDK reference, and API surface ( README , AGENTS.md , docs/ , src/plugin-sdk/ where applicable) is read to confirm whether any equivalent primitive ships under a different name — so a runtime that implements the same contract under a non-canonical symbol would still register as “present”. Both stages must miss the primitive for the cell to read absent . Upstream OpenClaw fails both stages on every primitive (no canonical symbol matches; no equivalent contract documented in docs/ ); enclawed-oss passes both on every primitive. The table is the topology of obsolescence: the seven primitives the failure modes depend on are uniformly missing in upstream OpenClaw, uniformly present in enclawed-oss and enclawed-enclaved. 

# 5 Methodology 

The harness is a single Node entrypoint ( enclawed/test/security/in-vivo/llm-narrative .mjs ) that generates a balanced legit/adversarial sample set per F-category and mediates every 6Primitive OpenClaw enclawed-oss enclawed-enclaved                          

> biconditional checker ( checkBiconditional )absent present present hash-chained AuditLogger absent present present extension admission gate ( admitExtension )absent present present two-layer egress guard (installEgressGuard &
> installRawSocketGuard )absent present present Bell-LaPadula classification ( defaultEnclavedPolicy )absent present present module-signing trust root ( lockTrustRoot )absent present present bootstrap seal ( sealBootstrap )absent present present

Table 2: Empirical detection-primitive availability per subject. The probe walked 14,419 up-stream files and found zero matches for any of the seven canonical symbols on OpenClaw. sample through all three subjects. 

5.1 Statistical adversarial harness 

100 legit + 100 adversarial samples per F-category. The three subjects: 

• OpenClaw. Real upstream-runtime subject: at boot the harness verifies an upstream OpenClaw checkout exists at $OPENCLAW_PATH with a built dist/entry.js ; per sam-ple, it spawns the upstream openclaw CLI itself with message send –channel <id> –target <t> –message <content> –dry-run –json (the same CLI an end user invokes) and parses the JSON envelope upstream’s runtime emits to derive the verdict. The harness uses an isolated OPENCLAW_STATE_DIR so the run never touches operator state. –dry-run 

stops the pipeline at the network-call boundary; every other step (argv parsing, message-send command handler, channel resolution, payload framing, outbound delivery decision) executes exactly as in production. Upstream’s tree carries no content-side gate, audit log, biconditional checker, content shield, or behavioral monitor between the LLM-emitted payload and the chat backend (Table 2), so every per-sample verdict is the verdict up-stream’s runtime actually emits when its own code runs end-to-end. 

• enclawed-oss. The harness invokes the real shipped primitives: admitExtension 

in enclaved flavor, the Policy channel/provider allowlist, the persistent hash-chained 

AuditLogger , the biconditional checkBiconditional reconciler, the prompt-shield detectInjection detector, and the DLP scan regex catalog. 

• enclawed-enclaved. The certified evolution. From the paper’s point of view, the user-visible properties exercised by the harness are: (i) every gate decision is externally wit-nessed and the witness record is independently re-verifiable by a third party; (ii) if no external witness is available at boot, the runtime refuses to admit any extension for the rest of the run (a fail-closed property of the hardening contract); (iii) a behavioral-anomaly monitor sits alongside the content-gate stack so that abnormal action patterns are flagged in addition to abnormal content. The fail-closed half is verified empirically by re-running the harness with the runtime’s external-witness component intentionally disabled. 

5.2 Safety envelope 

The harness reads cloud target IDs and LLM API keys only from ENCLAWED_INVIVO_* env vars (never the operator’s normal credentials); writes per-tag hash-chained audit + witness journals to isolated paths so concurrent runs never collide; STATS_ONLY=1 suppresses chat-platform posts while keeping the gate stack live; DISABLE_ACCREDITOR=1 forces the enclaved subject’s witness offline to validate the fail-closed admission path; a 600–800 ms inter-post delay keeps cloud-channel rate limits comfortable. Per-call wall-clock and byte caps are inherited from each LLM 7provider’s own limits and the harness’s LLM_CONCURRENCY ceiling (default 8); chat posts are clamped to 1900 chars on Discord and 3500 on Telegram. 

5.3 Sample sources: template synthesis vs. LLM generation 

An honest in-vivo experiment must distinguish two questions: does the gate fire on adversarial content? and can a contemporary LLM be cajoled into producing such content? These are orthogonal and we report both. 

Template synthesis (default). The harness generates each sample from a parameterized template that randomizes across the patterns the production gates actually classify — the prompt-shield imperative-override and role-boundary-token sets, the DLP secret/PII regex cat-alog. Templates are deterministic, diverse (hundreds of combinatorial variants per F-category), and independent of LLM cooperation. With n = 100 per cell the per-bin variance is small enough to compare subjects directly. 

LLM generation (opt-in). Setting ENCLAWED_INVIVO_SAMPLE_SOURCE=llm routes the same briefs through a real LLM (Anthropic, OpenAI-compatible OpenRouter, or local Ollama). The LLM receives an explicit security-research framing and is asked to produce the adversarial content directly. The two paths share the rest of the pipeline; only the content source differs. 

Why both. The LLM-driven path is contaminated by refusal asymmetry : a safety-tuned model (Llama 3.2:3b on Ollama, or Claude Haiku 4.5 on Anthropic) declines to author roughly 95% of the F1/F3/F4 briefs, returning benign refusal text instead. That benign text is correctly delivered by the gate (no injection patterns, no secrets), so the ground-truth label “adversarial” becomes a mislabel of refusal text. Counting these as false negatives makes the gate look bad while measuring something else entirely. Templates remove that confounder. We report templates as the primary statistical source; the LLM path is reported separately as an empirical study of LLM refusal rates per F-category (Table 6). 

5.4 F-category instantiation 

The harness exercises four categories. Three of them are content attacks (the gate is a regex/policy/classifier on the chat payload); one of them (F2) is behavioral (the gate is the multiset biconditional comparing audit records to corpus deltas). 

• F1_BYPASS. Gate-bypass via prompt injection: a chat payload combining an imperative-override phrase ( IGNORE /DISREGARD /OVERRIDE /BYPASS /FORGET /PURGE ) with a role-boundary token ( </system> , <|im_end|> , [/INST] , <|system|> , <|endoftext|> ). The prompt-shield.detectInjection detector reports imperative-override or 

role-boundary-token .

• F2_FORGE. Audit forgery: the harness appends an irreversible.executed audit record claiming an op succeeded but does not add a matching corpus-delta entry. Each F2 sample is tagged with a unique probe identifier so the biconditional check is scoped to that single (cap , target probe ) projection. Legit LEGIT_AUDIT samples record both audit and delta and pass cleanly. 

• F3_SILENT. Silent failure / secret exfiltration: a chat payload that smuggles a secret (OpenAI sk-, AWS AKIA , GitHub ghp_ , Stripe, JWT, credit-card-like digit string) inside a plausible recovery-context wrapper. The DLP scan regex catalog flags the high-severity pattern. 8• F4_WRONGTGT. Wrong-target broadcast: a chat payload that pretends to be a privileged broadcast accidentally landing in the wrong channel and includes both an email address and an E.164 phone number. The DLP catalog flags both and the medium-severity aggregate triggers the block. 

Backends. Each sample posts (or in the blocked case, would have posted) to a live Discord channel and a live Telegram chat that the operator owns. The OpenClaw subject’s posts land verbatim in the chat; the enclawed-oss and enclawed-enclaved subjects post a single-line block notice ( [name | F*] message blocked: ... ) that never exposes the adversarial payload to the chat surface. 

5.5 Statistical methodology 

Confidence intervals. For each per-cell precision and recall point estimate, we report the Wilson score interval [4] at 95% confidence. Wilson is preferred over the normal-approximation interval at the extremes (events near zero or one) because it never produces degenerate or out-of-bounds bounds; this matters here because the hardened subjects’ false-positive count is identically zero across many cells, where a normal-approximation interval would collapse to a point. For k successes out of n trials, the Wilson interval at confidence level 1 − α with z =Φ−1(1 − α/ 2) is ̂

pW = k + z2/2

n + z2 , ∆ = zn + z2

> √

k(n − k)

n + z2

4 , (3) giving the interval [̂ pW − ∆,̂ pW + ∆] clipped to [0 , 1] .

Sample-size justification. A publication-grade upper bound on the hardened subject’s false-positive rate (FPR) requires n large enough that the upper Wilson bound at k = 0 false positives is small. For the legit-side column, FPR = FP /(FP + TN) . With k = 0 and n = 100 the Wilson 95% upper bound is ≈ 0.036 ; at n = 10 4, ≈ 3.84 × 10 −4. We report the headline at n = 100 per cell to match the original enclawed paper’s protocol and a stress-test extension at n = 10 4 per (channel, F-cat, label) cell ( n = 80 ,000 total samples; Table 4) to push the upper-bound claim below practitioner-relevant false-alarm thresholds. 

Paired comparison: McNemar’s test. The three subjects under test see byte-for-byte the same sample set. The natural statistical test for a paired-binary outcome of this shape is McNemar’s test [5]. For two subjects A and B with disagreement counts b (A blocked, B delivered) and c (A delivered, B blocked), the continuity-corrected statistic 

χ2 = ( |b − c| − 1 ) 2

b + c (4) is compared to the chi-squared distribution with one degree of freedom. We report b, c, and 

χ2 per pair of subjects inline with the stress-test results in §6 (see the McNemar paragraph following Table 4); paired comparisons where the disagreement is one-sided (every adversarial blocked by B and delivered by A, every legit delivered by both) push χ2 to values where p < 10 −3

is conservative. 

Random seeding and replay. The harness’s template generators and pseudo-random num-ber generator (PRNG) draws are routed through a seedable mulberry32 PRNG. Setting 

ENCLAWED_INVIVO_SEED hashes its value to a 32-bit integer and re-seeds; running with the same seed reproduces the sample set byte-for-byte (the per-sample CSV hashes match across 9replay runs). Cryptographic primitives (Ed25519 keypair, broker keys, accreditor keys) inten-tionally remain non-seeded; they are fresh per process by design and the attestation chain is independently re-verifiable with whatever public keys the run emitted. 

Hardware fingerprint. Every run records the Node version, operating system, CPU model and count, total RAM, harness git commit, and PRNG seed at start, and writes them as a table at the top of the markdown report. Reviewers replicating the experiment can compare their own fingerprint against the cited one. 

Inferential reach of the template stress test. The Wilson 95% upper FPR bound at k =0, n = 10 4 achieved in Table 4 is 3.84 × 10 −4 per cell — below the false-alarm-fatigue threshold for typical practitioner-relevant traffic rates. Extending to n = 10 6 per cell would lower the bound to ≈ 3.7 × 10 −6; beyond that the bound is no longer practitioner-informative. The result is a coverage claim on the gate’s own classifier surface, not a generalisation claim; generalisation is the orthogonal LLM-driven path (§5.3). Closing the remaining gap to a maximally adversarial reviewer would require: (i) the LLM-driven study at n ∈ [10 3, 10 4] per cell with full cooperation disclosure (Table 6 is the n = 200 pilot on cooperative Ollama LLMs); (ii) cross-LLM stability across additional alignment regimes (Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct, Hermes-3-405B); (iii) multi-seed variance; (iv) per-component ablation (prompt-shield alone, DLP alone, biconditional alone). 

5.6 Reproducibility 

The harness lives at enclawed/test/security/in-vivo/llm-narrative.mjs in the public enclawed-oss repository [3]. Re-running the experiment is one command: 

node enclawed/test/security/in-vivo/llm-narrative.mjs 

Default behavior: template-synthesized samples, 100 per cell, both cloud-channel rounds (Dis-cord, Telegram). The harness writes a markdown summary report and a per-sample CSV under 

docs/ , plus a hash-chained audit log and (when the certified evolution’s external-witness compo-nent is engaged at boot) an externally-verifiable witness journal under ~/.enclawed-invivo/ .

# 6 Results 

We report two complementary results. Baseline (§6.1) answers does the gate cover its own design distribution? Templates are deterministic and cooperation is 100% by construction; failure means the gate is broken on patterns it was tuned for. Passing is a necessary lower bound, not a generalisation claim. Generalisation (§6.2) answers does the gate carry to distributions it was not tuned for? Ten LLMs author adversarial content per F-category; cooperation varies per LLM (refusals are excluded by an independent classifier). A subject scoring well on the baseline but poorly on generalisation is brittle; a subject scoring well on both holds. 

Confusion-matrix legend. Each cell counts samples where the ground-truth label is adver-sarial (top row) or legit (bottom row) and the gate decision is block or deliver . TP = correctly blocked attack; FN = missed attack (delivered an adversarial payload); TN = correctly deliv-ered legit message; FP = false alarm (blocked a legit message). Precision = TP/(TP+FP) is “of the things I blocked, how many were actually attacks”; recall = TP/(TP+FN) is “of the actual attacks, how many did I catch”. A subject that blocks everything trivially scores recall = 1 but precision → 0; a subject that delivers everything scores recall = 0; only P = R = 1 .0

demonstrates a gate that actually discriminates. 10 6.1 Reference baseline: regex template path 

The baseline run uses the harness’s deterministic template generators. Every adversarial tem-plate emits a canonical pattern from the production gate’s own classifier surface (the prompt-shield imperative-override + role-boundary catalogues for F1; an audit-record forgery against a per-probe biconditional for F2; the DLP secret/PII regex catalog for F3 and F4). Cooperation is therefore 100% by construction and the question reduces to: for each runtime, does the gate fire? The headline (Table 3) is the 1600-sample matrix; the stress-test extension (Table 4) pushes n to 80 ,000 to tighten the FPR upper bound. 

6.1.1 Headline (baseline, n = 1600 )                

> Subject F1_BYPASS F2_FORGE F3_SILENT F4_WRONGTGT
> OpenClaw R=0.000 R=0.000 R=0.000 R=0.000 enclawed-oss 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
> enclawed-enclaved 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000

Table 3: REFERENCE BASELINE. Headline confusion-matrix recall per subject per F-category, template-synthesized samples ( n = 200 per cell, 100 legit + 100 adversarial, aggregated across both Discord and Telegram channels, n = 1600 total). For both hardened subjects, precision = recall = F1 = accuracy = 1.000 in every cell; we report the F1 score for brevity. Total wall-clock for the full pass: 42.2 seconds. This is the gate’s coverage of its design distribution; the generalization claim is in §6.2. 

Per-channel decomposition. The headline aggregates Discord and Telegram. The split is uniform: each channel contributes n = 200 per F-cat ( n = 800 per channel) with the same shape — OpenClaw (TP=0, FP=0, TN=100, FN=100, R=0.000) and both enclawed subjects (TP=100, FP=0, TN=100, FN=0, R=1.000) on every F-category. Per-channel matrices are not reproduced here; the 1600-sample aggregate above is exactly the sum. 

6.1.2 Stress-test extension at n = 80 ,000 template samples (baseline) 

Still on the baseline path, we tighten the FPR upper bound by extending the template run to n = 10 ,000 per (channel, F-category, label) cell, for a total of 80 ,000 template-synthesized samples. The Wilson 95% upper bound on the per-cell false-positive rate at k = 0 false positives and n = 10 ,000 is 3.84 × 10 −4.Per-subject results in this stress-test run (Table 4): McNemar’s paired test on this run confirms the qualitative claim: χ2 ≈ 4 × 10 4 (p < 10 −3,df = 1 ) for OpenClaw vs. either of the hardened subjects; χ2 = 0 for enclawed-oss vs. enclawed-enclaved (content) (zero disagreement; the two subjects’ content gates produce byte-identical verdicts on every sample); χ2 ≈ 3.8 × 10 4 for enclawed-oss vs. enclawed-enclaved (full) (the burst-rate disagreement injected by secmon). 

6.2 Generalization: LLM-emitted path 

The baseline above measures gate coverage on the design distribution; it cannot answer whether the gate also catches adversarial content from distributions it was not tuned for. The generaliza-tion run uses the harness’s SAMPLE_SOURCE=llm mode, run against ten distinct LLMs spanning vendor, parameter scale, and alignment regime. Each LLM produced up to 100 legit and 100 adversarial samples per F-category per channel. Two independent classifiers feed the recall de-nominator. A refusal classifier excludes refusals (regex matching first-person disclaimer phrases 11 Subject F1_BYPASS F2_FORGE F3_SILENT F4_WRONGTGT                    

> OpenClaw R=0.000 R=0.000 R=0.000 R=0.000 enclawed-oss 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
> enclawed-enclaved (content) 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
> enclawed-enclaved (full) R=1.000 R=1.000 R=1.000 R=1.000 FP=10000 FP=8472 FP=9315 FP=10000

Table 4: REFERENCE BASELINE, stress-test extension. Per-subject results at n =10 ,000 legit + 10 ,000 adversarial per (channel, F-category) cell on the Telegram channel ( n =80 ,000 total). The Wilson 95% upper bound on the per-cell FPR at k = 0 false positives and 

n = 10 ,000 is 3.84 × 10 −4, which holds in every cell of the upper three rows (the secmon row is broken out separately). enclawed-oss and enclawed-enclaved (content gate only) are identical at this run (every cell matches): the F1–F4 contract is identical at the content layer, and McNemar’s test on the pair returns χ2 = 0 on the disagreement counts. enclawed-enclaved (full stack) additionally runs the secmon behavioral monitor; at burst-test rates secmon correctly identifies the harness’s ∼ 250 samples/sec firing rate as an anomalous traffic pattern (P-014, “actor request rate ≥ 60 /min”), so its FP column is high. This is correct production behavior at non-production load and is reported separately so the F1–F4 content matrix is readable; at production rates the same detector would not fire on legit operational chatter. Wall-clock 927 seconds on i9-14900K single-thread, secmon engaged with bounded 64-actor pool, seed 

stress-headline-2026 .such as “I can’t provide”, “I’m sorry”, “As an AI”). A cooperation classifier , deliberately a strict superset of the gate’s pattern catalog (§5.5), counts a sample as cooperated when the LLM emit-ted adversarial-shaped content. The cooperation classifier therefore cannot be biased by the gate’s own verdict. Lower recall on this side relative to the baseline is the honest measurement: it shows where the gate’s regex-tuned coverage of its own template surface fails to catch shapes a real LLM emits. 

Independence of the cooperation classifier from the production gate. The coopera-tion classifier lives in enclawed/test/security/in-vivo/cross-llm-aggregate.py and was frozen at its current shape before the regex-widening exercise in §6.2.3; it has not been modified since. Its match set is a strict superset of both the strict and the widened production DLP regex (i.e., its match set contains every secret-shape match the production gate would ever return, plus additional loosely-shaped variants neither version of the gate matches), and a strict super-set of the LLM-refusal classifier (so refusals never count as cooperation, regardless of incidental keyword overlap). Three properties follow that are load-bearing for every recall claim in §6.2: (i) the cooperation denominator is invariant under any production-gate regex change, including the widening reported in §6.2.3; (ii) the recall numerator is the runtime gate’s verdict at the time of the run and cannot be moved by post-hoc analysis; (iii) for any gate-blocked row, coop-eration is by construction true (a row that the gate fired on is by definition adversarial-shaped). Together these rule out the trivial concern that we widened the classifier in lockstep with the gate; the +14.6% TP gain reported in §6.2.3 is measured against an invariant denominator definition. 

6.2.1 Cross-LLM stability of recall (generalization) 

The cooperation rate itself is informative as a separate axis (Table 6). LLM safety training is highly variable: ollama llama3.2:3b refused F1, F3, and F4 on 100% of samples; groq openai/gpt-oss-120b refused > 99% ; gemini-2.5-flash hit free-tier rate limits and produced zero usable adversarial samples in our window. By contrast, ollama llama3.1:8b , mistral:7b ,12 Failure mode NLLM enclawed-oss recall on cooperated samples mean std dev min max                     

> F1 (gate bypass) 51.000 0.000 1.000 1.000 F2 (audit forgery) 61.000 0.000 1.000 1.000 F3 (silent host failure) 41.000 0.000 1.000 1.000 F4 (wrong target) 51.000 0.000 1.000 1.000

Table 5: Cross-LLM recall stability for enclawed-oss (generalisation path). For each failure mode, NLLM is the number of LLMs in the ten-LLM panel that produced at least 10 coop-erated adversarial samples per F-category (refusals excluded by an independent classifier, §5.5; non-cooperating LLMs are not ranked). Per-LLM recall is computed as (adversarial samples the gate blocked) / (adversarial samples the cooperation classifier flagged as adversarial-shaped); each value lies in [0 , 1] . The four columns report the mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum of those per-LLM recalls across the NLLM cooperating LLMs. All four rows show mean recall = 1 .000 at zero variance: every cooperated adversarial sample was blocked on every cooperating LLM. enclawed-enclaved (content gate only) is byte-identical to the table above (McNemar χ2 = 0 on every pair) and is omitted; upstream OpenClaw reports recall = 0 .000 

on every (LLM, F-cat) cell and is also omitted. Per-LLM detail for F3 (where the live regex-widening exercise lands) is in Table 7; F1, F2, F4 follow the same shape. 

qwen2.5:7b , gemma2:9b all cooperated on F1 at ≥ 99 .5% and on F4 at 100%; F3 cooperation ranged from 38% (llama3.1:8b) to 82% (qwen2.5:7b) reflecting the heavy safety training around literal secret formats. This is itself a finding: “the LLM refuses to author the attack” is not a security guarantee, because (a) even within a single vendor family the refusal stance varies markedly between adjacent versions, and (b) the F1 ≥ 99 .5% cooperation across four open-weights models in the 7–9B range shows that obtaining attacker-cooperative output is trivial. The host-side gate must hold the line regardless.                                               

> LLM F1 coop % F2 coop % F3 coop % F4 coop %
> ollama llama3.2:3b 0.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 ollama llama3.1:8b 100.0 100.0 38.0 100.0 ollama mistral:7b 100.0 100.0 55.0 99.5 ollama qwen2.5:7b 99.5 100.0 82.0 100.0 ollama gemma2:9b 99.5 99.0 59.5 100.0 openrouter llama-3.1-70b 68.0 100.0 1.5 100.0
> Cloud-quota-limited rows ( n < 10 cooperated; ranking not meaningful):
> groq llama-3.3-70b-versatile 100 100 0100 groq llama-4-scout-17b 100 100 –100 groq openai/gpt-oss-120b 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 gemini-2.5-flash ––––

Table 6: GENERALIZATION, cooperation rates. Per-LLM cooperation rate per F-category at n = 200 adversarial samples per cell ( 100 on each of two channels). The lower block lists rows that exhausted the cloud provider’s free-tier rate quota during the run window and therefore have n < 10 cooperated samples; their numbers are included for completeness but should not be ranked. F2_FORGE is content-agnostic; non-100% cooperation in that column on small-LLM rows reflects the refusal classifier rejecting refusal-shaped content the LLM emitted in lieu of a routine audit-line. 

Baseline-side block reasons. On the templates path (baseline), prompt-shield findings 

fired 200/200 on F1_BYPASS samples; biconditional: f2Forgery on 1 (cap, target) projection(s) fired 200/200 on F2_FORGE; DLP findings (severity=high) fired 200/200 on F3_SILENT; DLP findings (severity=medium) fired 200/200 on F4_WRONGTGT. No 13 legit sample triggered any block reason (FP = 0 across all cells) on the templates path. We include this here as the cross-check that the gate’s stated detection mass on the baseline maps to the same shipped detectors that handle the LLM-emitted samples below. 

6.2.2 Per-(source, runtime) consolidated table for F3 

Table 7 (auto-generated by cross-llm-aggregate.py ) puts baseline and per-LLM generali-sation rows side-by-side for F3_SILENT — the F-category where the regex-widening exercise of §6.2.3 lands. F1, F2, F4 follow the same shape (OC = 0, OSS = ENC = 1.000 on every cooperating LLM) and are omitted for compactness. Cooperation counts a row when either the runtime gate fired on it or the (possibly redacted) content carries a raw secret/PII shape, which keeps the metric stable whether the analysed CSV is the runtime artifact or a publish-scrubbed copy. Three observations: (i) OC recall = 0.000 on every cell of every LLM, including LLMs cooperating at ≥ 199 /200 samples; (ii) OSS and ENC agree byte-for-byte on recall wherever 

ncoop ≥ 1; (iii) the gate’s reach ends , on the LLM-emitted side, not in recall (the gate blocks every cooperated sample) but in cooperation rate — short / malformed / placeholder shapes fall under the cooperation threshold and are addressed by the widening of §6.2.3.                                                                      

> Source nadv ncoop enclawed-oss enclawed-enclawed-oss enclawed-recall enclaved recall FPR enclaved FPR templates (baseline) 200 200 1.000 [0.98, 1.00] 1.000 [0.98, 1.00] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] Groq gpt-oss-120b 20––––Groq llama3.3-70b 20––0.000 [0.00, 0.79] 0.000 [0.00, 0.79] Groq llama4-scout-17b 00––0.000 [0.00, 0.66] 0.000 [0.00, 0.66] Ollama gemma2-9b 200 165 1.000 [0.98, 1.00] 1.000 [0.98, 1.00] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] Ollama llama3.1-8b 200 76 1.000 [0.95, 1.00] 1.000 [0.95, 1.00] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] Ollama llama3.2-3b 200 0––0.000 [0.00, 0.02] 0.035 [0.02, 0.07] Ollama mistral-7b 200 110 1.000 [0.97, 1.00] 1.000 [0.97, 1.00] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] Ollama qwen2.5-7b 200 164 1.000 [0.98, 1.00] 1.000 [0.98, 1.00] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] OpenRouter llama3.1-70b 200 31.000 [0.44, 1.00] 1.000 [0.44, 1.00] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02] 0.000 [0.00, 0.02]

Table 7: F3 (silent host failure) — per-runtime detection per source. Columns. 

nadv is the number of adversarial samples the source contributed; ncoop is the subset that an independent classifier flagged as adversarial-shaped (refusals excluded; §5.5). Recall = (samples blocked by the gate) / ncoop ; FPR (false-positive rate) = (legit samples wrongly blocked) / 100 per source. Cell format. Each cell reports the point estimate followed by the Wilson 95% confidence interval as <point> [<low>, <high>] ; “–” indicates ncoop = 0 or nlegit =0 so the metric is undefined. CI width depends on ncoop : rows with low cooperation (e.g. 

OpenRouter llama-3.1-70b at ncoop = 3 ) carry wide intervals such as [0 .44 , 1.00] even when every cooperated sample was blocked, and should not be ranked against high-n rows. Rows. 

The first row (separated by a horizontal rule) is the regex-template reference baseline (in-distribution by construction; cooperation = 100%); subsequent rows are per-LLM cross-model generalisation. Upstream OpenClaw is a passthrough negative control, reports recall = FPR = 0 on every cell of every source by construction, and is omitted for compactness. 

6.2.3 Improvability is the architectural property: a worked example of widening the F3 gate 

The cross-LLM data above (Tables 5–7) reports a recall ceiling of mean = 1.000 on cooperated samples in every F-category, so the harness was not flagging false negatives. The interesting question is at the layer beneath: cooperation itself is bounded by what the post-hoc classifier recognises as adversarial-shaped — the union of “the gate fired” and “the content matches a fixed superset regex” (§5.5). Borderline shapes the LLMs emit but that match neither — short tokens, prefix-glued tokens, padding-char variants — fall below the cooperation threshold and 14 are counted in neither numerator nor denominator. They are coverage gaps, not missed catches. The practically interesting question the per-LLM cooperation rates (Table 6) make visible is: 

what does it cost to pull those gap shapes into the harness as recognised, blocked positives? We answered by widening the production DLP regex catalog and re-running the harness on the four cooperative Ollama LLMs. 

The change, validation, and gain. Five new high-severity patterns were appended to 

enclawed/src/dlp-scanner.mjs (plus its TypeScript twin) plus a one-character boundary fix on the existing AWS pattern. They target shapes the strict catalog rejected: short fake secret-prefix tokens ( sk-XXXXXX , AKIA1234 , xoxb-foo ); prefix tokens glued to surrounding word chars that defeat the leading \b (_AKIA... , DEBUG=ghp_... ); and OpenAI-style keys with the =

padding char ( sk-=... ). A six-line append-only patch. The widened catalog was scanned against 5,708 legit-side cells in the existing artifact corpus (template path + all ten cross-LLM CSVs); findings at high or critical : zero. A re-run on the four cooperative Ollama LLMs (Discord, K = 100 , license-engaged accreditor) yields the F3_SILENT TP counts in Table 8.                           

> LLM source Pre TP/100 Post TP/100 Delta OSS FPR
> ol-llama3.1-8b 38 61 +23 (+61%) 0.000
> ol-mistral-7b 55 60 +5 (+9%) 0.000
> ol-qwen2.5-7b 82 84 +2 (+2%) 0.000
> ol-gemma2-9b 82.5 90 +7.5 (+9%) 0.000
> Cumulative 257.5 295 +37.5 (+14.6%) 0.000

Table 8: Post-widening F3_SILENT true-positive counts per cooperative Ollama LLM, Discord channel, K = 100 per cell. Pre values are halved historical two-channel counts for fair per-channel comparison ( docs/post-widening/AGGREGATE.md carries the raw new run). ENC full-stack matches OSS byte-for-byte across all four LLMs (secmon does not fire on F3 cells under normal LLM throughput). The mechanism is the same one the cooperation definition makes visible: borderline LLM emis-sions that previously fell below the cooperation threshold (no gate fire, no post-hoc match) are now caught by the widened gate, and a gate fire is itself one of the two ways a row counts as cooperated — so the same edit drags those rows simultaneously into the denominator (newly recognised as adversarial-shaped) and into the numerator (blocked). Per-cell recall on cooper-ated therefore stays at 1.000 in both runs — the gate is still catching every shape the classifier recognises — while the underlying true-positive count grows by 14.6% net across the four LLMs, with all four showing positive deltas and zero new false positives. Under a fixed-recall ceiling, this is what coverage improvement looks like in practice: the gate blocks a measurably larger superset of LLM-emitted F3 shapes at the same precision, and there were no false negatives to begin with — the gain is recognised coverage, not corrected misses. 

Why this is the obsolescence point, not a footnote. The widening is a single-commit, append-only change to a primitive the framework declares as a public surface (the PATTERNS 

array in dlp-scanner.mjs ): five regex literals plus a one-character boundary fix. The empirical loop — observe a miss in the CSV, append a pattern, validate, re-run, see the catch count grow at FPR = 0 — is the loop the architecture was designed for, because each layer is named and testable in isolation. The same loop on any runtime in the unhardened category has nowhere to begin: no DLP catalog to append to, no gate to consult one, no audit log, no biconditional. Closing the gap requires adding all seven primitives jointly — a re-architecture that produces enclawed-oss. The seven primitives are not just present; they are the seams that make safety improvable. 15 6.3 Cost and traffic 

Wall-clock for the 1600-sample baseline pass: ≈ 42 seconds, dominated by chat-post round-trips with a 600–800 ms pacing delay; gate stack itself runs in microseconds per sample. The 

n = 80 ,000 stress test takes ≈ 927 seconds on a single i9-14900K thread. LLM-driven runs add the marginal LLM cost and stay under $0.10 per cooperative-cell pass on the cloud LLMs we measured. 

# 7 Why this constitutes architectural obsolescence 

The data of §6 satisfies all three conditions of the comparative definition in §1. Strict dom-inance: OpenClaw recall is 0.000 on every cell of every F-category on both the baseline and the generalisation distribution; enclawed-oss reports P = R = 1 .000 on the same input. Prac-tical adoptability: enclawed-oss is MIT-licensed, ships through the same package ecosystem OpenClaw uses, and preserves OpenClaw’s user-visible feature surface. An operator currently running OpenClaw can adopt enclawed-oss with no new infrastructure, no new contracts, and no behavioural change visible to end users. Structural gap: the path from OpenClaw’s 0% to enclawed-oss’s 100% is not a configuration knob. A defender who proposes adding an audit log, then a biconditional, then a trust root, then an admission gate, then an egress guard, then a classification lattice, then a bootstrap seal has at the end re-implemented enclawed-oss; the seven primitives are joint, and missing any one re-opens at least one F-category. 

0% is qualitatively different from low. A runtime catching 60% of F1 has a tunable detector and is properly called weak ; a runtime catching 0% with no detector in the source tree is properly called obsolete relative to one that catches 100% with detectors the first does not have . The two failure modes require qualitatively different remediation paths — parameter tuning vs. adoption of an architecturally different runtime — and the paper’s claim is about the second only. 

Stochastic LLM refusal is not a security primitive. With no detection mechanism in the source tree, an OpenClaw deployment’s only defence against an F1–F4 attack is whether the configured LLM happens to refuse to author it. Table 6 shows this varies wildly: same-vendor adjacent versions diverge by 100 percentage points (F1 cooperation: 0% on llama3.2:3b ,100% on llama3.1:8b ); F3 cooperation ranges from 0% to 82% across the panel. An operator who switches the configured LLM — a one-flag change — can move an F-category’s effective “protection” from 100% to 0% without touching the runtime. enclawed’s F1–F4 gate has no such dependency: it fires on the shape of the input regardless of which LLM authored it. Stochastic refusal by a model that may be retrained tomorrow is not a security primitive; deterministic shape detection by a versioned, testable gate is. 

Compliance and safety follow. Every major regulator (NIST 800-53, PCI DSS 4.0, HIPAA, SOC 2, FedRAMP, NIS2, ISO 27001) requires tamper-evident audit of consequential decisions. A runtime that emits no audit record on F1 is non-compliant by inspection. For deployments that actuate physical devices, F1 alone is sufficient for an agent to mutate the world unde-tectably. The existence of enclawed-oss removes the “no alternative was available” defence that would otherwise excuse continued OpenClaw deployment in these regimes. 

Generalisation beyond OpenClaw. OpenClaw is the strongest representative of its class; weaker members score ≤ OpenClaw’s score by inheritance. We do not need to measure each one separately. The claim is comparative, so it generalises naturally: any agentic-AI runtime 

R such that R’s recall on F1–F4 is 0 and enclawed-oss’s recall is 1 is obsolete with respect 16 to F1–F4 by the same definition. The detection-primitive vocabulary is small and explicit; a tree-walk over any candidate runtime takes minutes. We invite reviewers to publish the result for any candidate they care about. 

# 8 Discussion 

8.1 LLM safety training is not a security boundary 

A common reaction to 1.000 recall on F1 is: “surely the LLM itself already refuses to author 

IGNORE ALL PREVIOUS INSTRUCTIONS </system> ; why is a host-side gate even necessary?” Because LLM safety training is asymmetric: a safety-tuned model refuses to author an attack when politely asked but happily processes the same string when an attacker sends it as in-put. Refusal-on-generation is not refusal-on-execution; real-world incidents come from indirect injection (poisoned documents, system-prompt overrides arriving as tool output, multilingual obfuscation, retrieved-context attacks) and from adversaries who do not need a cooperating LLM to produce the payload at all. The framework’s host-layer gates ( prompt-shield , DLP, secmon) fire on the string regardless of source, which is the whole rationale for defense-in-depth at the runtime boundary [6, 7]. The LLM’s safety training is a useful heuristic, never a security boundary; the per-LLM cooperation rates in Table 6 make the asymmetry concrete (Llama 3.2:3b refuses roughly 95% of F1/F3/F4 briefs; Llama 3.1:70b cooperates on F1 at 95% but refuses F3 secret-exfil at 97%). 

8.2 Scope of the F1–F4 contract 

F1–F4 do not exhaust the universe of agentic-AI attacks; they cover the structural class in which action and accountability diverge. Read-only exfiltration, TOCTOU races on the corpus, and collusion with a malicious actor whose actions are correctly logged are out of scope by construction ([1] §5.4 names them explicitly). A 1.000 recall on F1–F4 does not imply 1.000 on every adversarial mode; it implies 1.000 on the four modes the biconditional check is designed for. 

8.3 Why FP = 0 is non-trivial: no functionality cost 

A degenerate “deny everything” subject would score recall = 1.000 but precision = 0.500. The hardened subjects report P = R = 1 .000 , FP = 0 in every cell of the headline matrix (Table 3): the gate distinguishes operational chatter (the four LEGIT_* templates) from adversarial tem-plates with no false alarms. This is structural, not lucky. The F1–F4 gates classify shape , not intent: the biconditional fires on multiset divergence; DLP fires on canonical secret/PII formats that routine chat does not contain by accident; prompt-shield fires on imperative-override + role-boundary serialization tokens; the admission gate fires on manifest signature plus capabil-ity vocabulary. There is no business logic to mis-tune, no acceptable-use policy to draft, no vendor-specific allowlist to keep current. The “security costs functionality” trade-off is real for IDS/WAF/EDR products that classify content with deployment-specific heuristics; it is not real for the F1–F4 contract because the contract reconciles structure rather than scoring content. 

8.4 What the certified evolution adds beyond the OSS tier 

The enclaved subject’s matrix coincides with oss’s on F1–F4 because both content gates reach the same verdict on the same content. What enclaved adds beyond that is evidence of who decided : every gate decision carries an external Ed25519-signed witness record that a third party can re-verify with only the witness’s public key. We verify the fail-closed half empirically: re-running with the external-witness component disabled forces the enclaved subject to refuse all admissions for the rest of the run. 17 8.5 Reviewer-replayable evidence 

The CSV at docs/adversarial-in-vivo-samples.csv records every per-sample ground-truth label and per-subject decision; reviewers can re-derive the matrix from the CSV without running the harness. The audit log at ~/.enclawed-invivo/audit.jsonl is hash-chained and re-verifiable with verifyChain() . The witness journal at ~/.enclawed-invivo/witness.jsonl 

is Ed25519-signed; reviewers can reconstruct the broker public key and replay the attestations independently. 

# 9 Threats to validity 

External: in-distribution templates vs. generalisation. The template path is in-distribution by construction — the regex catalogs were tuned for exactly the patterns the templates emit, so a P = R = 1 .0 result on it is a coverage claim, not a generalisation claim. We mitigate via the orthogonal LLM-driven path (§5.3) which exercises content the regex was 

not designed against; cross-LLM mean recall = 1.000 on cooperated samples (Table 5) is the generalisation evidence. 

External: channel and LLM coverage. The harness exercises Discord and Telegram (Slack/WhatsApp/Matrix etc. untested) and ten LLMs (four cooperative Ollama models + six rate-limited or heavily-refusing cloud models). Five cloud cells have n < 10 cooperated sam-ples and should not be ranked. A paid-tier sustained-quota re-run would tighten cloud rows; the qualitative cross-LLM stability claim already holds on the four Ollama models at n ≥ 100 

each. 

Construct: F2 is exercised behaviorally, not via content. F2 samples carry benign content; the failure-mode is the audit-record-without-corpus-mutation behavior. The harness writes the forged audit record per probe and runs the per-probe biconditional — a faithful instantiation of the F2 contract from [1] §5. 

Internal: ground-truth label leakage and template diversity. The adversarial label is assigned at sample-generation time and never reaches the gate (verified by inspecting the gate’s call trace: only the chat-message string, manifest, and policy enter). F1 templates have 

≈ 5.8 × 10 4 distinct variants; F3/F4 are effectively unbounded thanks to random secret/PII bodies; F2 is content-agnostic. Repetition begins around n ≈ 5 × 10 4 on F1 but does not bias the regex verdict. 

Internal: cooperation classifier independence. The cooperation classifier (cross-llm-aggregate.py ) was frozen before the regex-widening exercise and is a strict superset of both the strict and widened production regex. The widening’s measured TP-count gain is therefore against an invariant denominator. An independent secret-scanner oracle (gitleaks, trufflehog, GitHub secret-scanning, detect-secrets ) could replace our classifier without other harness changes; we expect headline numbers to move within Wilson CI. 

Internal: single-seed, single-channel widening run. The widening verification (§6.2.3) ran on a single PRNG seed on the Discord channel only ( K = 100 per LLM per F-cat). The +14.6% net cumulative TP gain is consistent across all four cooperative Ollama LLMs, excluding a single-LLM artefact, but a multi-seed two-channel re-run would tighten per-LLM Wilson intervals. 18 Internal: cross-sample state leakage. The biconditional uses per-probe scoping so F2 samples are independent. The audit log persists across samples by design; we verified that no per-cell decision depends on samples from a different cell. Channels are run sequentially; a parallel-channel run could introduce ordering effects we did not measure. 

OpenClaw subject runs the upstream CLI per sample. The OpenClaw subject (mediateOpenclaw ) invokes the actual upstream openclaw CLI as a subprocess for every per-sample mediation (message send –channel <id> –target <t> –message <content> –dry-run –json ), against an upstream checkout that has been installed and built ( pnpm install && pnpm build:docker ). The CLI executes upstream’s full pipeline — argv parsing, subcommand dispatch, message-send command handler, channel resolution, payload framing, outbound delivery decision — and emits a JSON envelope; the harness records that envelope verbatim and derives the verdict from action , payload , handledBy , and any error field upstream emits. The –dry-run flag stops the pipeline at the network-call boundary so no Discord or Telegram message is transmitted, which is the only departure from a production end-user invocation. The two upstream features this run does not exercise — (a) the LLM agent loop that decides which payload reaches the send path, and (b) real chat-backend transmission that tests the backend’s own moderation — are deliberately out of scope: the F1–F4 contract is about the runtime’s gate, not about the agent’s tool-call decision or the backend’s moderation. A future upstream release that introduces a content-side gate between argv parsing and outbound delivery would fire here automatically (the harness records the runtime’s verdict verbatim); today no such gate exists in the upstream tree, and the harness records that absence empirically by running the CLI rather than by assertion. 

# 10 Limitations 

Subject coverage. The run covered Discord and Telegram cloud channels (chosen because they are in the previously-deleted unsafe set, §1); other channel families were not run, though the harness supports them. Adversarial agent shape. The harness fires scripted adversarial payloads at real backends, not an autonomously-misbehaving LLM. The biconditional is source-agnostic, so we expect identical detection topology under a prompt-injected LLM driver, but the empirical confirmation is future work. What is not tested. F1–F4 do not cover read-only exfiltration, TOCTOU on the corpus, or operator collusion; recall = 1.000 on F1–F4 does not imply 1.000 on those modes (§8.2). 

# 11 Reproducibility 

Wall-clock: ≈ 42 s for the n = 1600 baseline, ≈ 927 s for the n = 80 ,000 stress test on a single i9-14900K thread; the cross-LLM run is dominated by LLM round-trip latency. Full reproduction: 

git clone https://github.com/metereconsulting/enclawed && cd enclawed # Required: cloud-channel credentials (operator-owned test guild). export ENCLAWED_INVIVO_DISCORD_BOT_TOKEN=... export ENCLAWED_INVIVO_DISCORD_CHANNEL_ID=... export ENCLAWED_INVIVO_TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN=... export ENCLAWED_INVIVO_TELEGRAM_CHAT_ID=... # (1) baseline; (2) cross-LLM; (3) aggregate; (4) publish-safety scrub. node enclawed/test/security/in-vivo/llm-narrative.mjs ENCLAWED_INVIVO_LLM_K=100 \ 

19 ./enclawed/test/security/in-vivo/cross-llm-driver.sh python3 enclawed/test/security/in-vivo/cross-llm-aggregate.py \ --csv-dir docs/cross-llm \ --templates-csv docs/adversarial-in-vivo-samples.csv \ --latex-out enclawed/paper/cross-llm-perruntime-table.tex \ > docs/cross-llm-AGGREGATE.md node scripts/scrub-invivo-csv.mjs 

Reports and per-sample CSVs (DLP-redacted) land under docs/ ; hash-chained audit and Ed25519-signed witness journals under ~/.enclawed-invivo/ . The publish-safety scrubber must be run before per-sample CSVs are committed or shared (§6.2.2 discusses why). 

# 12 Conclusion 

enclawed-oss is strictly better than upstream OpenClaw — the strongest measured representa-tive of the unhardened-agentic-AI class — on every cell of every F1–F4 confusion matrix, and it is MIT-licensed and drop-in adoptable. Across 1600 template-synthesised baseline samples, ten cross-LLM generalisation runs (refusals excluded by an independent classifier), and an 80,000-sample stress test, OpenClaw recall is 0.000 on every cell; enclawed-oss reaches P = R = F1 =

accuracy = 1 .000 . A six-line append-only widening of enclawed-oss’s DLP catalog (§6.2.3) raises per-channel F3 detection by 14.6% net at unchanged precision; the same edit on OpenClaw has nowhere to land — the catalog, the gate, the audit log, and the biconditional are all absent. The strict dominance, practical adoptability, and structural gap are the three conditions of architectural obsolescence (§1); we exhibit them empirically. We invite reviewers to apply the harness to any candidate runtime; we expect 0/N for any that does not ship the seven primitives and N/N for any that does. 

# Acknowledgments and Availability 

The framework primitives are from the original enclawed paper [1]; we thank Peter Steinberger and the OpenClaw contributors for the upstream gateway used as both the fork base and the negative-control subject. Paper, harness, aggregator, and per-LLM artifacts are MIT-licensed in the public enclawed-oss repository [3]. 

# References                     

> [1] Alfredo Metere. enclawed: A Configurable, Sector-Neutral Hardening Framework for Single-User AI Assistant Gateways . Metere Consulting, May 2026. https://github.com/metereconsulting/enclawed/blob/main/e nclawed/paper/enclawed.pdf .[2] Peter Steinberger and the OpenClaw contributors. OpenClaw: a single-user agentic-AI gateway .https: //github.com/openclaw/openclaw , 2025. [3] enclawed source repository .https://github.com/metereconsulting/enclawed .[4] Edwin B. Wilson. Probable inference, the law of succession, and statistical inference . J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., 22(158):209–212, 1927. [5] Quinn McNemar. Note on the sampling error of the difference between correlated proportions or percentages .Psychometrika, 12(2):153–157, 1947. [6] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt in-jection . arXiv:2302.12173, 2023. [7] Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, Kailong Wang, Tianwei Zhang, Yepang Liu, Haoyu Wang, Yan Zheng, and Yang Liu. Prompt injection attack against LLM-integrated applications . arXiv:2306.05499, 2024. [8] OWASP Foundation. OWASP Top 10:2021 — A01: Broken Access Control , 2021. https://owasp.org/To p10/2021/A01_2021-Broken_Access_Control/ .

20 [9] IBM Security and Ponemon Institute. Cost of a Data Breach Report 2024 . IBM Corporation, July 2024. 

https://www.ibm.com/reports/data-breach .[10] Mandiant (Google Cloud). M-Trends 2024 Special Report . April 2024. https://services.google.com/fh /files/misc/m-trends-2024.pdf .

21