Title: Dsat: A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.09347v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 01:23:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

# Yaofang Zhang # 

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles 

# Ken Zhou #

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles 

# Adnan Darwiche # 

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles 

Abstract 

Discrete variables are common in many applications, such as probabilistic reasoning, planning and explainable AI. When symbolic reasoning techniques are brought in to bear on these applications, a standard technique for handling discrete variables is to binarize them into Boolean variables to allow the use of Boolean computational machinery such as SAT solvers. This technique can face both computational and semantical challenges though. In this work, we develop a native SAT solver for discrete logic, which is a direct extension of Boolean logic in which variables can take arbitrary values. Our proposed solver has a similar design to Boolean SAT solvers, with ingredients such as unit resolution and clause learning but ones that operate natively on discrete variables. We illustrate the merits of the developed SAT solver by comparing it empirically to CSP solvers applied to discrete CNFs, to Boolean SAT solver applied to binarized CNFs, and to some hybrid solvers. 

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Automated reasoning; Theory of computation → Logic and verification 

Keywords and phrases Discrete Variables, CDCL SAT Solvers, Unit Resolution, Clause Learning 

# 1 Introduction 

Boolean logic and its associated computational machinery have found much use in AI and computer science over the last few decades, including to problems that are not symbolic in nature [ 24 ]. For example, beyond symbolic applications like verification, synthesis and planning, Boolean logic played an influential role in probabilistic reasoning [ 17 , 15 ] and more recently explainable AI; see, e.g., [ 18 , 49 , 4 , 3, 29 , 28 ]. Many of the applications targeted by Boolean logic involve discrete or discretized variables that can have many values, which are handled using binarization techniques. The treatment of discrete variables through binarization, instead of natively, is usually motivated by the potent computational machinery for Boolean logic, particularly SAT solvers. This can be seen, for example, in the constraint satisfaction (CP) literature where in recent CSP solver competitions, 1 the leading CSP solvers — PicatSAT [ 57 , 55 ] and OR-Tools CP-SAT [ 43 , 42 ] — both rely on binarization techniques that represent CSPs using Boolean variables. 2

The binarization of discrete variables can pose both computational and semantical challenges though, calling for additional efforts that treat discrete variables natively. In explainable AI, for example, it has been argued that such native treatment can be critical  

> 1

MiniZinc Challenge [52] (also https://www.minizinc.org/challenge ) and XCSP3 Competition [5].  

> 2

A central technique used by CP-SAT is lazy clause generation (LCG) [ 51 ], which incrementally (i.e., lazily) generates Boolean variables and Boolean clauses that represent constraints on the original (discrete) variables of the problem. CP-SAT also uses standard SAT technology of clause learning. This solver is developed by Google as part of their OR-Tools library ( https://developers.google.com/ optimization/cp/cp_solver ). PicatSAT focuses more on optimizing the encoding of discrete variables into Boolean variables, e.g., using techniques in [ 56 ]. PicatSAT then calls an existing state-of-the-art SAT solver, e.g., kissat [14], on the transformed problem. 

> arXiv:2605.09347v1 [cs.AI] 10 May 2026

2 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

for the proper formalization of certain explanations [ 32 , 18 ]. In this work, we take a further step in this direction by proposing a conflict-driven clause-learning (CDCL) SAT solver for 

discrete CNFs, also called signed CNFs in [ 11 ]. A discrete CNF is a conjunction of discrete clauses, where a discrete clause is a disjunction of discrete literals. A discrete literal is a subset of the values for a discrete variable. Hence, discrete CNFs provide a native (direct) representation of clausal constraints over discrete variable that does not rely on binarization. 3

Discrete CNFs were initially studied in [ 11 ], where it was shown that their satisfiability remains NP-complete for binary clauses. Additional results included a corresponding reso-lution rule and a DPLL algorithm for satisfiability. Later work [ 2] studied the connections between the closure of discrete CNFs under (unit) resolution and the application of various notions of consistency to the corresponding CSPs. As far as we know, there has been only two prior works [ 36 , 31 ] on developing native SAT solvers for discrete CNFs but they do not seem to have provided a practical alternative to binarization approaches (more on this later). The need for “a highly efficient many-valued SAT solver incorporating the recently developed SAT technology” was later emphasized in [ 1], which is the task we undertake in this work. We will describe our solver using detailed pseudocode in the spirit of works such as [23]. This paper is structured as follows. We start in Section 2 by defining the syntax and semantics of discrete logic, where we motivate it further from the lens of explainable AI. Section 3 discusses unit resolution in discrete logic and proposes a lazy algorithm similar to what is currently employed by Boolean SAT solvers. Section 4 presents our proposed CDCL SAT solver for discrete CNFs, called Dsat , after proposing a clause learning algorithm based on unit resolution proofs, and a method for making decisions based on discrete literals. Section 5 provides an empirical evaluation of Dsat , based on a number of benchmark families, and against a number of baseline solvers. Section 6 closes with some concluding remarks. 

# 2 Discrete Logic 

We start with the syntax, semantics and notational conventions of discrete logic as in [ 18 , 19 ]. 

Syntax. We assume a finite set of discrete variables Σ. Each variable X ∈ Σ has a finite number of states x1, . . . , x n, n > 1. A literal ℓ for variable X, called an X-literal, is a set of states such that ∅ ⊂ ℓ ⊂ { x1, . . . , x n}. We often denote a literal such as {x1, x 3, x 4} by x134 

which reads: the state of variable X is either x1 or x3 or x4. A literal is simple iff it contains a single state. Hence, x3 is a simple literal but x134 is not. If a variable X has two states, it is said to be Boolean or binary and its states are denoted by x and x. Such a variable has only two literals {x} and {x}, which are simple and denoted by x and x for convenience. A formula is either a constant ⊤, ⊥, literal ℓ, negation α, conjunction α · β or disjunction 

α + β where α, β are formulas. We find it convenient to treat literals as both sets and as formulas. Hence, for literals ℓ1 and ℓ2, ℓ1 ∩ ℓ2 and ℓ1 · ℓ2 are exchangeable. 

Semantics. The semantics of discrete logic follow directly from the semantics of Boolean logic. A world, denoted ω, maps each variable X in Σ to one of its states, denoted ω[X]. A discrete formula α can be turned into a Boolean formula under the variable settings of world 

ω as follows. We replace each X-literal ℓ in α with ⊤ if ω[X] ∈ ℓ and with ⊥ otherwise, which leads to a Boolean formula αω that has no variables. We say that world ω satisfies 

discrete formula α iff the corresponding Boolean formula αω evaluates to ⊤. We also say in    

> 3The lifting of Boolean logic syntax and semantics to a setting based on discrete variables has been pursued under various names in the past, including many-valued logic, signed logic, multiple-valued logic, discrete logic, etc. We prefer the term discrete logic as the other terms may give the impression that we are lifting the notion of a truth value (which has also been proposed in earlier AI works).

Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 3

this case that world ω is a model of α. Formula α implies/entails formula β, written α |= β,iff every model of α is also a model of β. In this case, we say α is stronger than β, and that 

β is weaker than α. A formula is satisfiable (consistent ) iff it has at least one model. A formula is valid iff it is satisfied by every world. The constant ⊤ will also be used to denote a valid formula, and ⊥ will be used to denote an unsatisfiable one. 

Normal Forms. A term is a conjunction of literals for distinct variables. A clause 

is a disjunction of literals for distinct variables. A term/clause is simple if all its literals are simple. Terms and clauses are often represented as sets (of their literals) so an empty term is valid and an empty clause is unsatisfiable. A Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF) is a disjunction of terms. A Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) is a conjunction of clauses. A 

Negation Normal Form (NNF) is a formula without negations. 

Explainable AI. The need to treat discrete variables natively, at least semantically, arises when explaining the decisions of classifiers; see [ 18 ]. In this context, a feature corresponds to a discrete variable X and a characteristic corresponds to one of its simple literals {xi}. An 

instance corresponds to a conjunction of simple literals (characteristics), one for each feature. A classifier can then be represented using a set of class formulas, which are discrete formulas in one-to-one correspondence with the classes of the classifier.          

> X
> c1Y
> ZZ
> c1c2c3
> x1x2x3
> y1y2y3
> z1z3z2z2z1z3

Consider the decision graph on the right which has three ternary features X, Y, Z and three classes c1, c 2, c 3. This classifier has 

27 instances, partitioned as follows: 20 instances in class c1, 3

instances in class c2 and 4 instances in class c3. Classes c1, c 2, c 3

can be represented using the following discrete formulas: ∆1 =

x12 + x3 · y1 · z13 , ∆2 = x3 · z2 and ∆3 = x3 · y23 · z13 . For example, instance I = x3 · y2 · z2 is in class c2 since I | = ∆ 2. Representing classifiers using class formulas allows one to reason about such classifiers independently of their forms which can vary significantly. One of the more recent developments in explainable AI notes that earlier treatments of explanations, based on Boolean features, lead to suboptimal explanations when lifted to a discrete setting in the obvious way. As a result, a more general treatment has been provided in the context of discrete logic, based on new logical operators for computing instance abstractions that are native discrete [ 32 ]. These and similar developments put discrete logic into focus recently. For example, they highlighted the need for computing prime implicants and implicates of discrete formulas, a subject that received almost no attention in the literature as discussed in [ 32 ]; see also [ 16 ] for difficulties that arise when attempting to perform this computation using binarization. A native SAT solver for discrete logic can help in these and similar computations. The compilation of class formulas into tractable forms can also benefit from such a solver (more on this in Section 5). 

# 3 Unit Resolution on Discrete CNFs 

Unit resolution is an inference rule in Boolean logic which plays a critical role in Boolean SAT solving. The rule allows us to infer clause α from literal ℓ and clause ℓ + α, and is used by SAT solvers to simplify CNFs and to efficiently detect some contradictions when searching for satisfying assignments. We now discuss unit resolution in discrete logic as it will also play a critical role in discrete SAT solving. Our definition of this inference rule will be based on the resolution rule for discrete clauses as defined in [ 32 ], a slight variation on the one in [ 11 ]. 

▶ Definition 1. Let α = ℓ + σ1 and β = ℓ′ + σ2 be two clauses, where ℓ and ℓ′ are X-literals, 

ℓ̸ |= ℓ′ and ℓ′̸ |= ℓ. The resolvent of α and β over variable X is σ = ( ℓ · ℓ′) + σ1 + σ2.4 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

Requiring ℓ̸ |= ℓ′ and ℓ′̸ |= ℓ ensures that the resolvant σ is not subsumed by either α or β.When variable X is Boolean, this condition ensures that literals ℓ and ℓ′ are conflicting. Unit resolution arises when at least one of the resolved clauses is unit (has a single literal). 

▶ Definition 2. Let ℓ1 and ℓ2 be X-literals such that ℓ1̸ |= ℓ2 and ℓ2̸ |= ℓ1. Resolving literal 

ℓ1 with clause ℓ2 + σ, called a unit resolution, gives the resolvent (ℓ1 · ℓ2) + σ. 

If ℓ1 · ℓ2 = ⊥, which always holds when variable X is binary, the result of unit resolution is the shorter clause σ which does not mention variable X. In discrete logic, unit resolution is defined even when ℓ1 · ℓ2̸ = ⊥. In this case, the resolvent (ℓ1 · ℓ2) + σ subsumes clause 

ℓ2 + σ but is not necessarily shorter so variable X is not eliminated from clause ℓ2 + σ.As an inference rule, discrete unit resolution is more complete than Boolean unit resolution when the latter is applied to certain binarizations of the given CNF; see Appendix A. 

# 3.1 A Lazy Algorithm 

It is well known that a Boolean CNF can be closed under unit resolution in time linear in the CNF size [ 53 ]. One can easily implement a procedure for unit resolution on discrete CNFs that is also linear in the CNF size, where the notion of size is defined as follows. 

▶ Definition 3. The size of a clause ℓ1 + . . . + ℓn is |ℓ1| + . . . + |ℓn|, where |ℓi| denotes the number of states in literal ℓi (size of ℓi). The size of a CNF is the sum of its clauses’ sizes. 

A binary variable X has only two literals, {x} and {¯x}, each containing one state. Hence, if all variables in a clause are binary, the clause size is its length according to Definition 3. A key advance in Boolean SAT solving is the technique of two-literal watching for implementing unit resolution [ 39 ], which provides a lazy way for detecting whether a clause has become unit; that is, whether all its literals but one have been falsified. This is important because a unit clause — corresponds to a variable setting in Boolean logic — triggers further unit resolutions. Two-literal watching is based on “watching” two literals in each clause β and visiting that clause only if one of these literals ℓ has been falsified (i.e., ℓ has been implied). A number of cases may arise when clause β is visited: the clause is now unit (every other literal in β but one is falsified); the clause is now subsumed (some literal in β is implied); or the clause is now empty (all its literals have been falsified) so we have a contradiction. If none of these cases materialize, another literal in β gets watched instead of literal ℓ.We will next propose a similar lazy algorithm for unit resolution on discrete CNFs, which will become a backbone of our proposed SAT solver. The first observation is that in a Boolean setting, a unit clause sets the state of a variable as it corresponds to either X = true or 

X = false for some Boolean variable X. However, in the discrete setting, a unit clause is a literal ℓ which corresponds to some states of some discrete variable X. The discrete unit clause does not set the state of variable X, but it prunes (falsifies) some of its states: those outside literal ℓ. This leads to the following interpretation of discrete unit resolution, which will form the basis for our lazy algorithm. If we have the unit clause ℓ, then all states s in literal ℓ are impossible and can be pruned from the CNF. Pruning a state s of some variable 

X amounts to removing s from all X-literals in the CNF. This pruning process strengthens clauses in the CNF and may lead to (1) deriving a literal ℓ′ if all literals in a clause, except for literal ℓ′, lose all their states, or (2) establishing a contradiction if all literals in a clause lose their states. If a literal ℓ′ is derived, we know that all states in ℓ′ are impossible, which means that more state pruning can be done. The process of state pruning continues until a contradiction is detected, or until there are no more states to prune. Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 5

Algorithm 1 provides our lazy implementation of unit resolution, which is based on the observation that not only do we need to watch two literals in each clause, but that each literal that is being watched must also watch one of its states. The reason is that not only do we need a lazy way for detecting whether a clause has become unit (or empty) but we also need a lazy way for detecting whether a literal has been falsified (i.e., all its states have been pruned). The clauses watching a literal ℓ are tracked in ℓ. watchedBy , and the literals watching a states s are tracked in s.watchedBy . We stress here that only literals that are being watched by clauses need to watch one of their states. Moreover, our technique does not require a literal to keep track of the state it is watching; only a state needs to keep track of the literals watching it. This is quite important for efficiency since a significant number of literals can get created during SAT solving as we shall see later; that is, literals that do not appear in the input CNF. This is a fundamental difference with Boolean CNFs where we have a fixed number of literals that are part of the input CNF and whose number is at most twice the number of Boolean variables (a discrete variable with m values has 2m − 2 literals). This difference will become more apparent when we discuss clause learning in Section 4.1. The three functions in Algorithm 1 – Decide (ℓ,Π), Undecide (Π), and Assert (ℓ,Π) – constitute an interface to unit resolution that will be utilized by the upcoming SAT solver. Here, Π is a CNF state, which contains a CNF and some bookkeeping data. For example, 

Π.dLevel is the decision level , which is initially set to 0 and incremented (decremented) every time we call Decide (Undecide ). Decide (ℓ,Π) adds the literal (unit clause) ℓ to the CNF, where literal ℓ is also called a decision in this case. It then runs unit resolution, and returns true or false , depending on whether unit resolution finds a contradiction. If 

false is returned, the clause that became empty is stored in Π.cClause and used later for learning a clause. Otherwise, the CNF state Π is changed into a new state Π′ which can be rolled back using Undecide (Π′). The functions Decide and Undecide do bookkeeping for the most part as the main implementation of unit resolution is embedded in the function 

Assert (ℓ,Π). The pair ⟨V, I ⟩ in Algorithm 1 represents a literal since V is a variable and 

I are some states of variable V . Our implementation represents states I using an array of integers so we can use bit-level operations when manipulating literals; see Appendix B. The following terminology and observations are useful for a further appreciation of the interface in Algorithm 1. If we add a literal ℓ (i.e., unit clause) to a CNF, we say that we have decided ℓ. If we later remove ℓ from the CNF, we say that we have undecided ℓ. In the context of SAT solving, we will make a sequence of decisions ℓ1, . . . , ℓ k and stop only when unit resolution (run after each decision) finds a contradiction. In that case, we will undecide some of these decisions in reverse chronological order, based on a criteria that we will discuss later. Algorithm 1 ensures that the CNF state Π is restored properly when we undecide. Furthermore, if unit resolution infers a literal ℓ, we say that literal ℓ has been 

derived. The states of each variable X are initially active. If we decide or derive an X-literal 

ℓ, then any active state in ℓ will be pruned and, hence, stop being active. A literal ℓ is 

implied if all states in ℓ are pruned. A literal ℓ is falsified if all states in ℓ are pruned. Even though multiple (and many) literals may be derived for a particular variable during unit resolution, undoing these derivations can be done in constant time (see Line 12 of Assert 

and Lines 5 & 6 of Undecide ). This is in contrast to what may happen when running a Boolean SAT solver on a binarized CNF. Algorithm 1 does some bookkeeping that is not needed for unit resolution but plays a key role in other ingredients of the SAT solver. We will discuss this bookkeeping next. 6 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

Algorithm 1 The Unit Resolution Interface (see Appendix B for missing function definitions)  

> 1:

function Decide (⟨V, I ⟩, Π) ▷ variable V and its states I (integer)  

> 2:

Π.dLevel ← Π.dLevel + 1 ▷ advance decision level; dLevel initially set to 0 

> 3:

Π.pTime ← 0 ▷ time at which a literal is derived at this decision level  

> 4:

Π.pVars ← [] ▷ properties at dLevel − 1 for variables pruned at dLevel  

> 5:

success ← Assert (⟨V, I ⟩, nil , Π) ▷ no reason ( nil ) for this decision  

> 6:

push Π.pTime to Π.tStack ▷ needed to restore pruning time upon backtracking  

> 7:

push Π.pVars to Π.vStack ▷ needed to restore variable properties upon backtracking  

> 8:

return success ▷ if false , Π.cClause is the conflict clause  

> 1:

procedure Undecide (Π) ▷ undo the last decision  

> 2:

pop Π.tStack  

> 3:

A ← pop Π.vStack ▷ active states at dLevel − 1 for variables pruned at dLevel  

> 4:

for ⟨V, I ⟩ ∈ A do ▷ variable V and its active states I (integer)  

> 5:

V. aStates ← I ▷ restore active states of variable V at dLevel − 1 

> 6:

pop V. lStack ▷ forget that variable V was pruned at dLevel  

> 7:

Π.dLevel ← Π.dLevel − 1 ▷ decrement the decision level  

> 1:

function Assert (⟨V, I ⟩, R, Π) ▷ asserted literal is neither implied nor falsified  

> 2:

Q ← [( ⟨V, I ⟩, R )] ▷ R is the reason for the assertion ( nil or clause)  

> 3:

while Q is not empty do ▷ propagating asserted literals  

> 4:

⟨V, I ⟩, R ← dequeue Q ▷ the states I of variable V are asserted  

> 5:

P ← V. aStates \ I ▷ states P need to be pruned  

> 6:

for s ∈ P do ▷ see Appendix B for efficiently iterating over states  

> 7:

s.pLevel ← Π.dLevel ▷ decision level at which state s was pruned  

> 8:

s.pTime ← Π.pTime ▷ time at which state s was pruned  

> 9:

s.reason ← R ▷ if R = nil , state s was pruned by a decision; otherwise, by clause R 

> 10:

increment Π.pTime ▷ incremented when a literal is derived  

> 11:

if Π.dLevel ̸ = V. lStack .top & Π .dLevel ̸ = 0 then ▷ V not yet touched at Π.dLevel  

> 12:

push Π.dLevel to V. lStack ▷ record that V is losing states at Π.dLevel  

> 13:

add ⟨V, V. aStates ⟩ to Π.pVars ▷ save V ’s active states at Π.dLevel − 1 

> 14:

V. aStates ← V. aStates ∩ I 

> 15:

for s ∈ P do ▷ see Appendix B for efficiently iterating over states  

> 16:

for ℓ1 ∈ s.watchedBy do ▷ iterate over literals watching the pruned state s 

> 17:

if not Falsified? (ℓ1) then ▷ ℓ 1 has active states  

> 18:

s′ ← Active-State (ℓ1) ▷ ℓ 1 finds another active state to watch  

> 19:

add ℓ1 to s′.watchedBy ; remove ℓ1 from s.watchedBy  

> 20:

else ▷ ℓ 1 is falsified (the only possible case if ℓ1.var is Boolean)  

> 21:

for each clause β in ℓ1.watchedBy do ▷ iterate over clauses watching ℓ1 

> 22:

ℓ2 ← other literal being watched by clause β 

> 23:

ℓ3 ← literal in β. literals s.t. ℓ3̸ = ℓ2 and Falsified? (ℓ3) = false  

> 24:

if literal ℓ3 exists then  

> 25:

if ℓ3.watchedBy is empty then ▷ β is the first clause to watch ℓ3 

> 26:

s3 ← Active-State (ℓ3) ▷ some active state of ℓ3 

> 27:

add ℓ3 to s3.watchedBy ▷ ℓ 3 now watches one of its active states  

> 28:

add β to ℓ3.watchedBy ; remove β from ℓ1.watchedBy  

> 29:

else ▷ ℓ 2 is the only potentially active literal  

> 30:

if Implied? (ℓ2) then do nothing ▷ β is subsumed  

> 31:

else if Falsified? (ℓ2) then ▷ all literals of clause β have been falsified  

> 32:

Π.cClause ← β ▷ save conflict clause β 

> 33:

return false ▷ contradiction found  

> 34:

else ▷ β derived literal ℓ2 

> 35:

add (⟨ℓ2.var , ℓ 2.states ⟩, β ) to Q 

> 36:

if ℓ1.watchedBy is empty then ▷ ℓ 1 no longer watched by any clause  

> 37:

remove ℓ1 from s.watchedBy ▷ ℓ 1 does not need to watch any state Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 7

# 3.2 Keeping Track of the Time and Reason for Falsification 

A central notion in our proposed solver is that of falsification, which applies to states, literals and clauses. When a state s of some variable X is known to be impossible, we say that the state has been falsified or pruned (we use the latter term more often). When every state in a literal ℓ has been pruned, we say that the literal has been falsified. When every literal in a clause has been falsified, we say the clause has been falsified (or became empty). Literal falsification is the key activity underlying unit resolution: when literals are falsified, clauses become shorter, leading to unit clauses (literal derivations) or empty clauses (contradictions). As such, we need to efficiently detect when a literal has been falsified which we addressed earlier (using watched states). We also need to keep track of the reason for a falsification and the time at which it took place as this information will play a key role later in backtracking and clause learning when a contradiction is found (discussed in Section 4). There are two possible reasons for pruning a state s of some variable X. The first is that we decided an X-literal ℓ by calling Decide (ℓ, Π) where s ∈ ℓ. The second is that we derived such a literal ℓ because a clause α became unit (Line 35 of Assert ). The reason is stored in 

s.reason as nil in the first case, and as clause α in the second case (Line 9 of Assert ). Falsification time is handled as follows. For a state s, falsification time is a pair ⟨t1, t 2⟩

where t1 is the decision level at which state s is pruned ( s.pLevel on Line 7 of Assert )and t2 is the time at that level when the state was pruned ( s.pTime on Line 8 of Assert )— Π.pTime is incremented when a literal is derived at that level (Line 10 of Assert ). The falsification time of a literal ℓ is the falsification time of the state s in ℓ that was pruned last. Such a state s is maintained only for certain literals during clause learning (Section 4.1). Finally, the falsification time of a clause β is the falsification time of the state s in β that was pruned last. We do not maintain this but will use it when making arguments in Section 4.1. The discrete SAT solvers discussed in [ 36 , 31 ] used lazy schemes that differ from what we proposed above. In [ 36 ], two literals of each clause are watched, and when a variable loses active states, all watched literals of that variable are visited. In [ 31 ], each clause watches two of its states, which differs from our method. We actually started with this method before switching to the more refined and efficient method of each clause watching two literals, and each literal (that is being watched) watching one of its states. 

# 4 CDCL SAT Solver for Discrete CNFs 

CDCL solvers learn a clause each time unit resolution discovers a contradiction [ 38 , 39 , 20 , 21 ]. A learned clause is implied by the CNF, and solvers usually seek empowering learned clauses which make unit resolution more complete [ 46 ]. These solvers use empowering clauses to combine search and inference as follows [ 20 ]. In the search part, they heuristically set variables to values (i.e., make decisions) with the hope of identifying a satisfying variable setting. During this search process, unit resolution may discover that the current variable setting is inconsistent with the CNF. Inference is invoked at this point to learn an empowering clause based on the unit resolution proof of inconsistency. The search process is then resumed but only after undoing some of the decisions and adding the learned clause to the CNF. The number of undone decisions is determined by the learned clause as we discuss later. If the CNF is unsatisfiable, unit resolution will eventually become complete enough to establish a resolution proof of unsatisfiability without any variable settings (i.e., decisions). In principle, one can learn any clause as long as it is implied by the given CNF. However, SAT solvers usually learn asserting clauses which are a subset of conflict clauses which are relatively easy to learn. Asserting clauses are also a subset of empowering clauses which are 8 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

useful to learn. We will explain these types of clauses next, starting with conflict clauses. Suppose we have applied a sequence of successful decisions ℓ1, . . . , ℓ n−1 to a CNF ∆ using the Decide function of Algorithm 1, followed by a decision ℓn that failed. At this point, a clause α is said to be a conflict clause if it satisfies two conditions: (1) unit resolution finds ∆ · α inconsistent (so α is implied by ∆ and can be learned) and (2) for every literal ℓ

of α, we can derive ℓ from ∆ · ℓ1 . . . · ℓn using unit resolution [ 54 , 46 ]. A key property of a conflict clause is that for at least one of its literals ℓ, unit resolution cannot derive ℓ from 

∆ · ℓ1 . . . · ℓn without involving the last decision ℓn in the derivation; otherwise, one of the earlier decisions must have failed (by the definition of a conflict clause). An asserting clause α is a conflict clause with exactly one literal ℓ for which ℓ cannot be derived from ∆ · ℓ1 . . . · ℓn without involving the last decision ℓn. This literal ℓ is called the asserting literal of α. Moreover, the assertion level of α is defined as the lowest decision level m at which unit resolution can derive ℓ′ for all literals ℓ′̸ = ℓ of clause α.4 If we undo decisions ℓm+1 , . . . , ℓ n (that is, backtrack to the assertion level m), the asserting clause α

will become a unit clause and, therefore, imply the asserting literal ℓ. An asserting clause α

is empowering [ 46 ]: it makes unit resolution more complete. In particular, if we learn α (i.e., add it to the CNF) and backtrack to the assertion level, unit resolution will derive literals that it could not have derived without this learned clause. 

# 4.1 Learning Discrete, Asserting Clauses 

We will now discuss how one can learn a discrete, asserting clause when a contradiction is detected by unit resolution (as implemented in Algorithm 1). This will constitute the second major building block for our upcoming SAT solver for discrete CNFs. Our approach is based on lifting the definitions we presented earlier for Boolean conflict clauses and Boolean asserting clauses to a discrete setting (which is different from the approaches in [36, 31]). We first note that the conflict level is the decision level at which a contradiction is discovered by unit resolution. This is also the level at which the clause learning process is applied, immediately after the contradiction is found. Consider Line 32 of Assert in Algorithm 1. At this point, unit resolution has falsified every literal of clause β so the clause became empty, we have a contradiction, and Π.dLevel is now the conflict level. Moreover, clause β is a conflict clause according to the definition we gave earlier so it is stored in the CNF state at Π.cClause . This clause β is not necessarily asserting and already appears in the CNF. Our goal then is to learn a new conflict clause based on β that is also asserting. As in the Boolean case, proposed initially in [ 23 ], we will do this by iteratively revising the conflict clause using resolution until it becomes asserting: 

1. β = clause that became empty during unit resolution 

2. while more than one literal in β has been falsified at the conflict level: 

a. s = state that was last pruned in clause β (state s appears in some literal of β)

b. α ← s.reason (s ∈ ℓ where literal ℓ was derived by unit resolution using clause α)

c. V ← variable of literal ℓ

d. β ← the resolvent of clauses α and β on variable V

3. return β

We need to take particular measures though when implementing the above procedure due to the issue we hinted at earlier: a discrete variable has an exponential number of literals, and     

> 4If an asserting clause is unit, its assertion level is 0(no decisions are made at level 0).

Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 9

the learning process may create a very significant number of literals that are not part of the input CNF and that will not appear in the returned learned clause. Due to this, our clause learning algorithm does not explicitly construct a conflict clause during its iterations. Instead, it uses V. cStates to store the states of variable V that appear in the (implicit) conflict clause. Moreover, it uses V. lastcState to store the state in V. cStates that was pruned last by unit resolution. If V. cStates = ∅, then variable V does not appear in the conflict clause and V. lastcState = nil . When the learning process terminates, we can explicitly construct the learned clause by iterating over variables V with V. cStates ̸ = ∅, constructing a literal for ⟨V, V. cStates ⟩ and adding it to the learned clause. The clause learning algorithm uses 

Π.aCount to store the number of literals in the conflict clause that have been falsified at the conflict level (i.e., literals with states pruned at the conflict level). When Π.aCount is 1, the conflict clause will be asserting and the learning process will terminate. 

Algorithm 2 Constructing an Asserting Clause (see Appendix B for missing function definitions) 

Require: Π.dLevel > 0; Π .aCount = 0; for every variable V , V. cStates = ∅; V. lastcState = nil 

Ensure: V. cStates holds the set of states of variable V that appear in the conflict clause  

> 1:

function Get-Asserting-Clause (β, Π) ▷ all literals of clause β are falsified  

> 2:

for ℓ ∈ β. literals do ▷ add all states in β to the conflict clause  

> 3:

Disjoin-Literal (ℓ, Π) ▷ adding states of literal ℓ to conflict clause  

> 4:

while Π.aCount > 1 do ▷ check if we have an asserting clause  

> 5:

V ← variable with the latest V. lastcState ▷ V appears in current conflict clause  

> 6:

α ← V. lastcState .reason ▷ α derived a V -literal that pruned V. lastcState  

> 7:

for ℓ ∈ α. literals do ▷ α cannot be nil here  

> 8:

if ℓ is a V -literal then  

> 9:

V. cStates ← V. cStates ∩ ℓ. states ▷ removing states from the conflict clause  

> 10:

V. lastcState ← Last-Pruned-State (V, V. cStates ) ▷ V. cStates are pruned  

> 11:

if V. lastcState .pLevel ̸ = Π .dLevel then ▷ fewer literals falsified at conflict level  

> 12:

decrement Π.aCount ▷ no more states in V. cStates pruned at conflict level  

> 13:

else  

> 14:

Disjoin-Literal (ℓ, Π) ▷ adding states of literal ℓ to conflict clause  

> 15:

// L are literals of asserting clause; ℓ ∈ L is asserting literal  

> 16:

// m is assertion level; ℓm ∈ L is last literal falsified at assertion level  

> 17:

return (L, ℓ, m, ℓ m) ▷ returned values are described above and can be computed easily  

> 1:

function Disjoin-Literal (ℓ, Π) ▷ add states of literal ℓ to the conflict clause  

> 2:

V, I ← ℓ. var , ℓ. states ▷ Disjoin-Literal will add states of I to V. cStates  

> 3:

s ← V. lastcState ▷ state of variable V that was pruned last (possibly nil ) 

> 4:

atC ← s̸ = nil & s. pLevel =Π .dLevel ▷ V -literal of conflict clause falsified at conflict level  

> 5:

S ← I \ V. cStates ▷ states of literal ℓ not already in conflict clause  

> 6:

for s ∈ S do ▷ see Appendix B for efficiently iterating over the states of a literal  

> 7:

add s to V. cStates  

> 8:

if s is nil or Pruned-After (s, V. lastcState ) then  

> 9:

V. lastcState ← s ▷ state s is the last falsified state in V. cStates  

> 10:

Update-Score (V, S, Π) ▷ needed for decision heuristic  

> 11:

if not atC and V. lastcState .pLevel =Π .dLevel then  

> 12:

increment Π.aCount ▷ V -literal in conflict clause is now falsified at conflict level 

Algorithm 2 contains the pseudocode for our clause learning method, where Get-Asserting-Clause is the main function. The code views the conflict clause (whether asserting or not) as a collection C of states (from different variables) such that pruning every state in C would lead to a contradiction. This clearly holds for the initial conflict clause discovered by Algorithm 1, which is initially passed to Get-Asserting-Clause to 10 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

start the learning process. The algorithm keeps iterating as long as the conflict clause has more than one literal falsified at the conflict level ( Π.aCount > 1). In each iteration, the algorithm identifies the state s in collection C that was pruned last by unit resolution, 5 then resolves the current conflict clause with clause α = s.reason over the variable of state s.

This resolution step can be viewed as removing and adding states into the conflict clause C

(removal on Line 9, and addition by calling Disjoin-Literal on Lines 3 and 14). To see that this learning algorithm will terminate, let reason α = ℓ+α0, conflict β = ℓ′ +β0,

s ∈ ℓ and s ∈ ℓ′. Resolving α and β over the variable of state s yields the new conflict clause 

(ℓ · ℓ′) + α0 + β0. Some states of the conflict clause β have been lost: those in literal ℓ′ but not in literal ℓ. Some new states have been added to the conflict clause: those in α0 but not in β0. By the semantics of reasons, the added states are guaranteed to be falsified earlier than state s, so function Get-Asserting-Clause is guaranteed to terminate. In particular, while Π.aCount may go up or down during the iterations of Get-Asserting-Clause , the falsification time of the conflict clause decreases monotonically. The original method for constructing asserting clauses in the Boolean setting was based on the notion of an implication graph [38 , 39 ], which captures a trace of derived literals by unit resolution up to a contradiction. Certain cuts in the implication graph correspond to asserting clauses, and some of these cuts produce more favorable clauses, called first-UIP clauses. The method based on resolution employed by Algorithm 2 produces first-UIP asserting clauses, with a complexity that is linear in the size of reason clauses. A clause learning algorithm was proposed in [ 36 ], which produced weak clauses as also observed later in [ 31 ] who provided a strengthening but with a costly time complexity that is lower bounded by a polynomial (the implication graph in [ 31 ] had pruned states as nodes instead of literals). 

# 4.2 Decision Heuristic 

The notion of a decision is central to SAT solving as it corresponds to selecting a portion of the search space to focus on by restricting the states of a variable. In a Boolean setting, the only way to restrict the value of a variable is by fixing its state to either true or false 

(i.e., assert a literal). In a discrete setting, the number of restrictions is exponential in the cardinality of a variable, each of which also corresponds to asserting a literal. Decision heuristics usually pick a variable first and then select one of its literals to assert (i.e., decide). 6 The decision heuristic in Dsat combines VSIDS-style scoring in Boolean SAT solvers [ 39 ] with information about the active states of variables. 7 An activity score is maintained for each variable and state. For states that are added into the conflict clause by 

Disjoin-Literal of Algorithm 2, we bump their scores and the score of their variable. A literal is selected by first choosing the variable with the highest V. score  

> |V. aStates |

. A subset of the variable’s states are chosen by continuously picking the state with the top score, until the sum of the scores of the picked states reaches a certain percentage (we used 30%) of the sum           

> 5The last pruned state can be found efficiently (e.g., with a heap) by getting the variable Vwith the latest pruned state V. lastcState (Line 5 of Get-Asserting-Clause ).
> 6For example, one heuristic is to prefer variables with fewer active states, called the “fail-first” principle [ 26 ]in the constraint satisfaction literature.
> 7In Boolean CDCL solvers, variable state independent decaying sum (VSIDS) [ 39 ] has been a very influential heuristic for variable ordering. An activity score is maintained for each variable, and it is bumped when the variable is in the learned clause; in practice, variables seen during conflict resolution are often bumped as well. The unassigned variable with the highest activity score is chosen for the next decision. To favor the recently seen variables, all scores are halved periodically; alternatively, many solvers increase the magnitude of the bump after every conflict. The phase of the decision variable is often selected using phase saving [45], which chooses the variable’s last assigned value (phase).

Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 11 

Algorithm 3 CDCL SAT Solver (see Appendix B for missing function definitions) 

1: function Dsat (Σ, ∆)

2: // – Σ is a set of pairs ⟨i, c ⟩ where i is a variable index and c is its cardinality 

3: // – ∆ is a set of clauses, where each clause is a set of pairs ⟨i, I ⟩: i is a variable index 

4: // and I is an integer representing a set of states (i.e., literal) 

5: Π ← CNF-State (Σ , ∆) ▷ holds CNF and bookkeeping data 

6: for each literal ⟨V, I ⟩ in Π.uClauses do ▷ treating unit clauses as asserted literals 

7: if Assert (⟨V, I ⟩, nil , Π) = false then ▷ conflict without decisions 

8: return false ▷ unsatisfiable 

9: while true do 

10: V, I ← Select-Literal (Π) ▷ decision heuristic: choose decision 

11: if V = nil then ▷ no more decisions to be made 

12: return true ▷ satisfiable 

13: success ← Decide (⟨V, I ⟩, Π) ▷ making a decision: literal ⟨V, I ⟩ not implied, not falsified 

14: while success = false do ▷ construct asserting clause and add it at assertion level 

15: multiply Π.bump by Π.bumpInc ▷ decision heuristic: increase bump magnitude 

16: β ← Π.cClause ▷ β is conflict clause, Π.dLevel cannot be 0

17: L, ℓ a, m, ℓ m ← Get-Asserting-Clause (β, Π) ▷ must be called at conflict level 

18: while Π.dLevel ̸ = m do ▷ backtrack to assertion level m

19: Undecide (Π) 

20: success ← Add-Asserting-Clause (L, ℓ a, ℓ m, Π) ▷ must be called at assertion level 

21: if success = false and m = 0 then ▷ conflict without decisions ( L = [ ℓa], ℓ m = nil )

22: return false ▷ unsatisfiable 

1: function Add-Asserting-Clause (L, ℓ a, ℓ m, Π) ▷ all literals in L are falsified except for ℓa

2: Π.pTime ← Π.tStack .top ▷ saved value used to resume unit resolution at assertion level 

3: Π.pVars ← Π.vStack .top ▷ saved value used to resume unit resolution at assertion level 

4: if L = [ ℓa] then ▷ unit asserting clause, ℓm = nil , Π.dLevel = 0 

5: return Assert (⟨ℓa.var , ℓ a.states ⟩, nil , Π) ▷ this assertion will never be retracted 

6: else 

7: γ ← Get-Clause (L, ℓ a, ℓ m, true ) ▷ constructs learned clause (will watch literals ℓa, ℓ m)

8: add clause γ to Π.clauses 

9: return Assert (⟨ℓa.var , ℓ a.states ⟩, γ, Π) ▷ may fail, leading to another asserting clause 

of the scores of all active states. 8 The resulting literal (states) is then asserted as a decision. It is not uncommon to make simple decisions in a discrete setting by fixing the state of a discrete variable instead of restricting its set of states ([ 36 ] used simple decisions; [ 31 ] did not specify its decision heuristic). We tried this initially but found it less effective as it may force the solver to commit prematurely and create unnecessary conflicts. 

# 4.3 The Dsat Solver 

We are now ready to discuss the CDCL SAT solver for discrete CNFs, the function Dsat 

in Algorithm 3. The solver has the same overall structure as a Boolean CDCL solver. First, our implementation of unit resolution assumes that all clauses have at least two literals so  

> 8

We found that extreme values for the threshold generally do not work well. In particular, choosing very few states often leads to more conflicts. Moreover, choosing most of the states (thus pruning very few) typically does not perform well either, for the following reason. Suppose a decision only prunes one state s, and some literal ℓ in s.watchedBy finds its last remaining active state s′ to watch, so ℓ is moved to s′.watchedBy . Then, when state s′ is pruned later, literal ℓ would be visited again. Now, consider the scenario where the decision prunes both s and s′. When the literal ℓ is visited in s.watchedBy , ℓ is falsified and would not be added to s′.watchedBy , so ℓ is visited one fewer time. 12 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

Dsat treats unit clauses in the input CNF as asserted literals ℓ that permanently prune the states in ℓ (Lines 6-8). If any of these assertions fail, the CNF is unsatisfiable; otherwise, the assertions will not be retracted later. Second, as long as the CNF is not found to be unsatisfiable, Dsat keeps making decisions until a contradiction is discovered by unit resolution. It then learns an asserting clause (Line 17), backtracks to the assertion level by retracting enough decisions (Lines 18, 19), adds the learned clause to the CNF (Line 20) and continues making decisions if the addition succeeds. The addition of a learned clause leads to deriving the asserting literal which may lead unit resolution to discover another contradiction which would lead to learning yet another asserting clause. If a contradiction is found by unit resolution without any decisions (Line 21), the CNF is unsatisfiable. This can only happen after adding a unit learned clause at decision level 0 (i.e., the assertion level is 0). 

# 5 Experiments 

We evaluated Dsat in three experimental settings: on randomly generated discrete CNFs at transition ratio, on CNFs generated from classical planning problems, and on the task of converting discrete NNF circuits into discrete CNFs which is relevant for explaining the decisions of classifiers. We will describe each experiment in more detail later. We compared Dsat with representative approaches from two broad categories. 9 One is to directly binarize the discrete CNF and call Boolean SAT solvers; for this, we used the PySAT library [ 30 ], 10 We used Cadical [ 12 ] with the sequential counters encoding and the pairwise encoding. 11 which implements a variety of schemes (e.g., pairwise, sequential counters) to encode cardinality constraints (e.g., at-most-one) as clauses, as well as Boolean SAT solvers that are augmented to support cardinality constraints natively. We also used PySAT’s Gluecard4 solver, 12 which natively handles cardinality constraints in addition to the standard clausal constraints. The other category of approaches is to call solvers that handles problems with discrete variables. We translated the discrete CNFs to the MiniZinc format [ 41 ], 13 which is supported by a variety of CSP solvers. We used the PicatSAT solver in our experiments. 14 

We implemented Dsat in C++. 15 In addition to the pseudo-code detailed in this paper, we also implemented a few widely used techniques: clause removal, restarts, and learned clause minimization [ 50 ], where we used learned literal blocking (LBD) [ 6] to guide clause removal and restarts [ 7]. It is worth noting that, Kissat [ 13 ] (used by PicatSAT), Cadical, and Glucose are state-of-the-art Boolean SAT solvers that use a far wider range of techniques. For example, a large set of techniques used by Cadical is listed in [ 12 ], including bounded variable elimination (BVE) [ 22 ] in pre-processing, phase saving [ 45 ] in decision heuristic, chronological backtracking [ 40 ] (in addition to non-chronological backtracking), and vivification [ 44 , 37 ].               

> 9The experiment did not include the two prior works [ 36 ,31 ] developing native discrete SAT solvers because the corresponding implementations are not publicly available.
> 10 https://github.com/pysathq/pysat
> 11 We tested all cardinality constraint encodings implemented in PySAT for all problems in the first two experiments, and found that sequential counters encoding overall performs the best.
> 12 Gluecard4 is built on top of the Glucose SAT solver [ 8], and integrates techniques first proposed in MiniCARD [35] to efficiently handle cardinality constraints.
> 13 Each discrete clause is directly translated as a constraint in MiniZinc using set membership and disjunction operators. No additional variables or constraints are introduced.
> 14 We also tried other top-performers in the recent MiniZinc challenges, OR-Tools CP-SAT [ 43 ] and Choco-solver CP-SAT [47], but PicatSAT performed better across our experimental settings.
> 15 Dsat source code is available at https://github.com/uclareasoning/dsat .

Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 13                           

> CNM2240 1027 4125 972 870 833 16 40 644 32 24 499 48 18 418 64 15 384
> Figure 1 Random 3-CNFs with discrete variables of cardinality C=2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 48, and 64. For each C, the number of variables N, and the number of clauses Mof the generated problem instances are shown on the left. The results are shown in the two figures on the right. The y-axis is plotted on a log-scale and shows the geometric means of runtime (top right) and number of decisions (bottom right) for 200 problem instances at transition ratio. PicatSAT is a CSP solver (called through the minizinc interface), for which we were not able to collect statistics for the # decisions.

These potent techniques have not been implemented in Dsat , so we will conduct a more comprehensive empirical evaluation when they are implemented. Yet, as the upcoming preliminary experiments show, Dsat can be significantly faster in some problems with variables of large cardinality. Appendix C reports on memory usage for the upcoming experiments, showing an overall advantage for Dsat compared to other solvers. 

# 5.1 Random 3-CNFs 

We will first use generated random 3-CNFs to examine the behaviors of solvers when the cardinality of the variables increases. The random 3-CNFs are parameterized by the number of variables N , the number of clauses M , and the variables all have the same cardinality C.For a variable X with cardinality C, an X-literal ℓ is sampled by first choosing the size |ℓ|

of the literal uniformly at random from 1 to C − 1, and then choosing a set of |ℓ| states of 

X uniformly at random. For C = 2 , 4, 8, 16 , 32 , 48 , and 64 , we generated problems with the value of MN at the transition ratio such that the problems are approximately 50% satisfiable – this creates challenging problems and also lets us compare how the solvers behave with both SAT and UNSAT instances. 16 To better gauge how the solvers scale across a wide range of C, for each cardinality, the number of variables N are chosen so that all the problems have roughly the same difficulty for PicatSAT, and takes PicatSAT about 1-2 seconds to solve. As we will see in the result, this lets us select problem sizes that are not too trivial or intractable for the four solvers. For each C, 200 problems instances are generated, and their parameters are shown on the left side in Figure 1. The experiment was run on an Intel i7-13700 processor, with a timeout of 600 seconds. Only one solver process was run at a time to minimize interference, and the process was pinned to a performance core.                 

> 16 For C= 4 ,8,16 ,32 ,48 ,64 , the MNratios we used are 8.1,11 .9,16 .1,20 .8,23 .2,25 .6. These are determined experimentally with a minimum of 500 problem instances.

14 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

The results are shown in the right two subfigures in Figure 1. In each plot, the x-axis is variable cardinality C in linear scale, and the y-axis is in log-scale. The y-axis shows the geometric mean runtime (seconds) in the top right figure, and geometric mean number of decisions in the bottom right. We can see that as C increases, Dsat scales much better than the other solvers tested. With C = 64 , these problems take PicatSAT close to 2 seconds, and are solved by Dsat in about 0.1 second. Cadical and Gluecard4 take about 10 seconds. For Cadical, the results with the sequential counters encoding are plotted; the results with the pairwise encoding are 10% - 20% slower for C = 48 and 64, but overall very similar. The plots for the geometric mean of the number of decisions closely mirror plots for the runtime: 

Dsat makes fewer decisions compared to Gluecard4 and Cadical, and the gap widens as C

increases. The results are shown for the SAT instances and the UNSAT instances separately, as well as for all instances combined. For all solvers, the UNSAT instances generally take longer to solve than SAT instances. Compared to other solvers, Dsat seems to show a slightly larger advantage in SAT instances, but the overall trends displayed in SAT and UNSAT instances are similar. 

# 5.2 Planning 

Since randomly generated CNFs often lack the structures in more realistic problems, we further tested the solvers using discrete CNFs generated from planning problems, which commonly involve discrete variables of large cardinality. We will first provide some background on the “planning as satisfiability” (SATPLAN) formulation, and then discuss our experiment using problems in the classic blocks world domain. 17 It was suggested in [ 34 ] that a classical planning problem can be converted into a series of increasingly larger SAT problems. With a given horizon T , a SAT problem can be created such that the problem is satisfiable iff it is possible to achieve the goal within T steps. For a planning domain with a set of state variables X and a set of (grounded) actions, at each time step t = 0 , 1, 2, ..., T , the converted SAT problem has a variable At indicating the action taken at time t, and for each state variable X ∈ X, there is a variable Xt indicating the value of X at time t. The preconditions and effects of the action at step t are encoded in clauses that involve the variables at time steps t and t + 1 . Note that the state variables are generally discrete, and the space of grounded actions can be large. For example, in the smallest blocks world problem in the experiment, with 7 blocks, there are 15 state variables with cardinality up to 8, and there are 

98 grounded actions so each action variable At has cardinality 98 ; it takes on average 21 steps to reach the goal. In the largest problem, with 23 blocks, there are 47 state variables with cardinality up to 24 , and each action variable At has cardinality 1058 ; it takes on average 

75 steps to reach the goal. In order to apply Boolean SAT solvers, each Xt is binarized by introducing a Boolean variable for every value of Xt, and the same applies for each At.18 

The blocks world planning instances have a number of blocks in the range 7 − 23 , with 

2 − 3 problems for each problem size, and 38 problems in total. Each planning problem is first translated from the (lifted) planning domain definition language (PDDL) representation using Fast Downward [ 27 ]19 into the (grounded) SAS+ [ 9 ] representation, which is then encoded into a series of T ∗ discrete SAT problems, where T ∗ is the shortest possible plan for     

> 17 We used problems from the International Planning Competition (IPC) benchmark instances collected in
> https://github.com/potassco/pddl-instances .
> 18 This binarized problem is often directly treated in literature [ 48 ], without describing the discrete version and the binarization step explicitly, as treated here.
> 19 https://github.com/aibasel/downward/

Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 15               

> Figure 2 Comparison of Dsat , Cadical, Gluecard4, and PicatSAT on CNFs for blocks world planning problems. X-axis is the number of blocks in the planning problem. Y-axis is the geometric mean runtime plotted on a log-scale. Problems with 7 blocks have an average of 315 variables and
> 9,653 clauses. Problems with 23 blocks have an average of 3,552 variables and 663 ,693 clauses.

the problem. For each planning problem, we select the 5 largest SAT problems solved in SATPLAN execution: one (satisfiable) problem with horizon T ∗ and four (un-satisfiable) problems with horizons T ∗ − 1, ..., T ∗ − 4; a total of 190 (non-incremental) SAT problems. The results are shown in Figure 2. Gluecard4 timed out on most instances after 21 blocks. For Cadical, the results with the sequential counters encoding are shown; Cadical with the pairwise encoding timed out (600s) on most of the smallest instances (7-8 blocks). We can see that Dsat performs better overall and its advantage grows with increasing problem size; on the hardest problems, Dsat is 1-2 orders of magnitude faster than the rest ( ≈ 2

seconds for Dsat vs ≈ 90 seconds for Cadical with 23 blocks). It is also worth noting that the performance of SATPLAN with Dsat on these blocks world problems is competitive with dedicated planners like Fast Downward. 

# 5.3 Converting NNFs into CNFs 

Finally, we will evaluate Dsat on converting discrete NNF circuits into discrete CNFs, using NNF circuits which correspond to class formulas of random forest classifiers that have been reported on in [ 33 ]. This task is relevant to computing explanations of classifier decisions since CNF representations of class formulas facilitate this computation. 20 The conversion algorithm is classical: it traverses the NNF circuit bottom up, computing a CNF for an AND-node by appending its children’s CNFs, and computing a CNF for an OR-node by performing a Cartesian product on its children’s CNFs. The main use of the SAT solver is to ensure that the CNF being computed incrementally has no subsumed clauses. Every time some clause α = ℓ1 + ... + ℓk is being added to the current CNF ∆, we check whether 

α is subsumed by checking if ∆ · ℓ1... · ℓk is unsatisfiable; clause α is only added if it is not subsumed. Since the conversion process may involve millions of clause subsumption checks, the algorithm (implemented in C++) uses incremental SAT solving, which is implemented  

> 20 CNFs are or-decomposable: disjuncts do not share variables. As such, CNFs allow one to compute complete and general reasons of decisions in linear time. These reasons are the basis for computing popular explanations such as sufficient and necessary reasons; see [18] for a tutorial/survey.

16 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic    

> Figure 3 Comparison between Dsat and Cadical for compiling NNF circuits into CNFs. Top row shows the compilation runtime. The bottom row is the size of the output CNF.

in Dsat following the IPASIR interface [ 10 ]. Because incremental solving is not supported in PicatSAT and Gluecard4, we will compare Dsat with Cadical for this compilation task. The experiment uses random forests trained with Weka [ 25 ] on three datasets used in [ 33 ], each with 2-3 output classes. For each dataset, random forests with different sizes are trained, all with depth of 4. Class formulas (NNFs) of the random forests are generated using [ 33 ]; there are 29 problems in total, and variables have cardinality up to 72. Figure 3 shows the experiment results; for each dataset and number of trees, the values are averaged over the dataset output classes. Results of Cadical with the sequential counters are plotted (the pairwise encoding is about 25% slower on the largest problems). For runtime (plotted on log-scale), Dsat performs better overall, and shows greater advantage for larger problems. For example, for the new-thyroid dataset with 30 trees, Dsat improves the compilation time by about 10x. Dsat is also able to generate smaller CNFs, since discrete unit resolution has more inferential power and is better able to simplify the CNF; see Appendix A. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We presented a CDCL SAT solver for discrete CNFs, which are CNFs in which a literal represents a set of possible values for a discrete variable. Our proposed solver is modeled around Boolean CDCL solvers with its major components being a unit resolution engine and a clause learning engine, both of which are native discrete. Our preliminary empirical results suggest that operating on discrete variables natively during SAT solving is a promising direction, in comparison to using Boolean/hybrid SAT solvers with binarization techniques. 

References       

> 1Carlos Ansótegui, Miquel Bofill, Felip Manyà, and Mateu Villaret. SAT and SMT technology for many-valued logics. Journal of Multiple-Valued Logic & Soft Computing , 2015.
> 2Carlos Ansótegui, Maria Luisa Bonet, Jordi Levy, and Felip Manyà. Mapping CSP into many-valued SAT. In João Marques-Silva and Karem A. Sakallah, editors, Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing - SAT 2007, 10th International Conference, Lisbon, Portugal, May 28-31, 2007, Proceedings , volume 4501 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 10–15. Springer, 2007. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-72788-0\_4 .

Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 17 

3 Gilles Audemard, Steve Bellart, Louenas Bounia, Frédéric Koriche, Jean-Marie Lagniez, and Pierre Marquis. On the computational intelligibility of Boolean classifiers. In KR , pages 74–86, 2021. 

4 Gilles Audemard, Frédéric Koriche, and Pierre Marquis. On tractable XAI queries based on compiled representations. In KR , pages 838–849, 2020. 

5 Gilles Audemard, Christophe Lecoutre, and Emmanuel Lonca. Proceedings of the 2023 XCSP3 competition. CoRR , abs/2312.05877, 2023. 

6 Gilles Audemard and Laurent Simon. Predicting learnt clauses quality in modern sat solvers. In IJCAI , volume 9, pages 399–404, 2009. 

7 Gilles Audemard and Laurent Simon. Refining restarts strategies for sat and unsat. In Michela Milano, editor, Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming , pages 118–126, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

8 Gilles Audemard and Laurent Simon. On the glucose sat solver. International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools , 27(01):1840001, 2018. doi:10.1142/S0218213018400018 .

9 Christer Bäckström and Bernhard Nebel. Complexity results for sas+ planning. Computational Intelligence , 11(4):625–655, 1995. 

10 Tomáš Balyo, Armin Biere, Markus Iser, and Carsten Sinz. Sat race 2015. Artificial Intelligence ,241:45–65, 2016. doi:10.1016/j.artint.2016.08.007 .

11 Bernhard Beckert, Reiner Hähnle, and Felip Manya. The SAT problem of signed CNF formulas. In Labelled Deduction , pages 59–80. Springer, 2000. 

12 Armin Biere, Tobias Faller, Katalin Fazekas, Mathias Fleury, Nils Froleyks, and Florian Pollitt. CaDiCaL 2.0. In Arie Gurfinkel and Vijay Ganesh, editors, Computer Aided Verification - 36th International Conference, CAV 2024, Montreal, QC, Canada, July 24-27, 2024, Proceedings, Part I , volume 14681 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 133–152. Springer, 2024. 

doi:10.1007/978-3-031-65627-9\_7 .

13 Armin Biere, Tobias Faller, Katalin Fazekas, Mathias Fleury, Nils Froleyks, and Florian Pollitt. Cadical, gimsatul, isasat and kissat entering the sat competition 2024. Proc. of SAT Competition , 8, 2024. 

14 Armin Biere and Mathias Fleury. Gimsatul, IsaSAT and Kissat entering the SAT Competition 2022. In Tomas Balyo, Marijn Heule, Markus Iser, Matti Järvisalo, and Martin Suda, editors, 

Proc. of SAT Competition 2022 – Solver and Benchmark Descriptions , volume B-2022-1 of 

Department of Computer Science Series of Publications B , pages 10–11. University of Helsinki, 2022. 

15 Mark Chavira and Adnan Darwiche. On probabilistic inference by weighted model counting. 

Artif. Intell. , 172(6-7):772–799, 2008. 

16 Arthur Choi, Andy Shih, Anchal Goyanka, and Adnan Darwiche. On symbolically encoding the behavior of random forests. CoRR , abs/2007.01493, 2020. 

17 Adnan Darwiche. A logical approach to factoring belief networks. In KR , pages 409–420. Morgan Kaufmann, 2002. 

18 Adnan Darwiche. Logic for explainable AI. In LICS , pages 1–11, 2023. 

19 Adnan Darwiche and Chunxi Ji. On the computation of necessary and sufficient explanations. In AAAI , pages 5582–5591. AAAI Press, 2022. 

20 Adnan Darwiche and Knot Pipatsrisawat. Complete algorithms. In Handbook of Satisfiability ,volume 336 of Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications , pages 101–132. IOS Press, 2021. 

21 Nachum Dershowitz, Ziyad Hanna, and Alexander Nadel. Towards a better understanding of the functionality of a conflict-driven sat solver. In João Marques-Silva and Karem A. Sakallah, editors, Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing – SAT 2007 , pages 287–293, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

22 Niklas Eén and Armin Biere. Effective preprocessing in sat through variable and clause elimi-nation. In Fahiem Bacchus and Toby Walsh, editors, Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing , pages 61–75, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 18 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

23 Niklas Eén and Niklas Sörensson. An extensible sat-solver. In Enrico Giunchiglia and Armando Tacchella, editors, Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing , pages 502–518, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

24 Johannes K Fichte, Daniel Le Berre, Markus Hecher, and Stefan Szeider. The silent (r) evolution of sat. Communications of the ACM , 66(6):64–72, 2023. 

25 Eibe Frank, Mark A Hall, and Ian H Witten. The weka workbench. online appendix for" data mining: Practical machine learning tools and techniques". 2016. 

26 Robert M Haralick and Gordon L Elliott. Increasing tree search efficiency for constraint satisfaction problems. Artificial intelligence , 14(3):263–313, 1980. 

27 Malte Helmert. The fast downward planning system. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research ,26:191–246, 2006. 

28 Alexey Ignatiev, Nina Narodytska, Nicholas Asher, and João Marques-Silva. From contrastive to abductive explanations and back again. In AI*IA , volume 12414 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 335–355. Springer, 2020. 

29 Alexey Ignatiev, Nina Narodytska, and João Marques-Silva. Abduction-based explanations for machine learning models. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , pages 1511–1519, 2019. 

30 Alexey Ignatiev, Zi Li Tan, and Christos Karamanos. Towards universally accessible sat technology. In 27th International Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing (SAT 2024) , pages 16–1. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024. 

31 Siddhartha Jain, Eoin O’Mahony, and Meinolf Sellmann. A complete multi-valued SAT solver. In David Cohen, editor, Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming - CP 2010 -16th International Conference, CP 2010, St. Andrews, Scotland, UK, September 6-10, 2010. Proceedings , volume 6308 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 281–296. Springer, 2010. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15396-9\_24 .

32 Chunxi Ji and Adnan Darwiche. A new class of explanations for classifiers with non-binary features. In JELIA , volume 14281 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 106–122. Springer, 2023. 

33 Chunxi Ji and Adnan Darwiche. Circuit representations of random forests with applications to xai. In The 4th World Conference on Explainable Artificial Intelligence . Springer Nature Switzerland, 2026. arXiv:2602.08362 .

34 Henry A. Kautz and Bart Selman. Planning as satisfiability. In Bernd Neumann, editor, 10th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, ECAI 92, Vienna, Austria, August 3-7, 1992. Proceedings , pages 359–363. John Wiley and Sons, 1992. 

35 Mark H Liffiton and Jordyn C Maglalang. A cardinality solver: more expressive constraints for free. In International Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing , pages 485–486. Springer, 2012. 

36 Cong Liu, Andreas Kuehlmann, and Matthew W. Moskewicz. CAMA: A multi-valued satisfiability solver. In 2003 International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, ICCAD 2003, San Jose, CA, USA, November 9-13, 2003 , pages 326–333. IEEE Computer Society / ACM, 2003. doi:10.1109/ICCAD.2003.1257732 .

37 Mao Luo, Chu-Min Li, Fan Xiao, Felip Manyà, and Zhipeng Lü. An Effective Learnt Clause Minimization Approach for CDCL SAT Solvers *. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-17) , pages 703–711, Melbourne, Australia, August 2017. URL: https://hal.science/hal-04321762 .

38 J.P. Marques Silva and K.A. Sakallah. Grasp-a new search algorithm for satisfiability. In 

Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Aided Design , pages 220–227, 1996. 

doi:10.1109/ICCAD.1996.569607 .

39 Matthew W Moskewicz, Conor F Madigan, Ying Zhao, Lintao Zhang, and Sharad Malik. Chaff: Engineering an efficient sat solver. In Proceedings of the 38th annual Design Automation Conference , pages 530–535, 2001. Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 19 

40 Alexander Nadel and Vadim Ryvchin. Chronological backtracking. In International Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing , pages 111–121. Springer, 2018. 

41 Nicholas Nethercote, Peter J Stuckey, Ralph Becket, Sebastian Brand, Gregory J Duck, and Guido Tack. Minizinc: Towards a standard cp modelling language. In International conference on principles and practice of constraint programming , pages 529–543. Springer, 2007. 

42 Laurent Perron, Frédéric Didier, and Steven Gay. The CP-SAT-LP solver (invited talk). In 

CP , volume 280 of LIPIcs , pages 3:1–3:2. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023. 

43 Laurent Perron and Frédéric Didier. Cp-sat. URL: https://developers.google.com/ optimization/cp/cp_solver/ .

44 Cédric Piette, Youssef Hamadi, and Lakhdar Sais. Vivifying propositional clausal formulae. In ECAI , volume 178, pages 525–529, 2008. 

45 Knot Pipatsrisawat and Adnan Darwiche. A lightweight component caching scheme for satisfiability solvers. In SAT , volume 4501 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 294–299. Springer, 2007. 

46 Knot Pipatsrisawat and Adnan Darwiche. A new clause learning scheme for efficient unsatisfi-ability proofs. In AAAI , pages 1481–1484. AAAI Press, 2008. 

47 Charles Prud’homme and Jean-Guillaume Fages. Choco-solver. Journal of Open Source Software , 7(78):4708, 2022. 

48 Jussi Rintanen. Planning and sat. In Handbook of Satisfiability: Second Edition , pages 765–789. IOS Press, 2021. 

49 Andy Shih, Arthur Choi, and Adnan Darwiche. A symbolic approach to explaining bayesian network classifiers. In IJCAI , pages 5103–5111. ijcai.org, 2018. 

50 Niklas Sörensson and Armin Biere. Minimizing learned clauses. In Oliver Kullmann, editor, 

Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing - SAT 2009 , pages 237–243, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

51 Peter J. Stuckey. Lazy clause generation: Combining the power of SAT and CP (and mip?) solving. In CPAIOR , volume 6140 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 5–9. Springer, 2010. 

52 Peter J. Stuckey, Thibaut Feydy, Andreas Schutt, Guido Tack, and Julien Fischer. The minizinc challenge 2008-2013. AI Mag. , 35(2):55–60, 2014. 

53 Hantao Zhang and Mark Stickel. An efficient algorithm for unit propagation. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics , 96, 1996. 

54 Lintao Zhang, Conor F. Madigan, Matthew W. Moskewicz, and Sharad Malik. Efficient conflict driven learning in boolean satisfiability solver. In ICCAD , pages 279–285. IEEE Computer Society, 2001. 

55 Neng-Fa Zhou and Håkan Kjellerstrand. The picat-sat compiler. In PADL , volume 9585 of 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 48–62. Springer, 2016. 

56 Neng-Fa Zhou and Håkan Kjellerstrand. Optimizing SAT encodings for arithmetic constraints. In CP , volume 10416 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 671–686. Springer, 2017. 

57 Neng-Fa Zhou, Håkan Kjellerstrand, and Jonathan Fruhman. Constraint Solving and Planning with Picat . Springer Briefs in Intelligent Systems. Springer, 2015. 20 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

# A Inferential Power of Discrete Unit Resolution 

As an inference rule, discrete unit resolution is more complete than Boolean unit resolution when the latter is applied to certain binarizations of the given CNF. This is the case, for example, if we use the standard binarization in which we: represent a discrete variable X with states {1, . . . , k } using binary variables x1, . . . , x k

represent a literal xS using the Boolean clause ∨ 

> i∈S

xi

add to the CNF the exactly-one constraints x1 + . . . + xk and xi + xj for i̸ = j

For an example, suppose variables X and Y have states {1, 2, 3, 4} each and consider the discrete CNF ∆ = ( x13 + y12 ) · (x24 ). Discrete unit resolution allows us to infer the literal y12 

from CNF ∆, which tells us that states 3 and 4 of variable Y are impossible. The standard binarization of ∆ is the CNF ∆b shown below: 

(x1 + x3 + y1 + y2) · (x2 + x4) · (x1 + x2 + x3 + x4) · (y1 + y2 + y3 + y4) ·

(x1 + x2) · (x1 + x3) · (x1 + x4) · (x2 + x3) · (x2 + x4) · (x3 + x4) ·

(y1 + y2) · (y1 + y3) · (y1 + y4) · (y2 + y3) · (x2 + x4) · (x3 + x4).

This Boolean CNF ∆b implies the clause α = y1 + y2 but it does not contain any unit clauses so we cannot derive α from ∆b using unit resolution. Neither can we refute ∆ · y1 · y2 using unit resolution. Hence, we cannot show ∆b |= y1 + y2 either by derivation or refutation using Boolean unit resolution, yet we could derive literal y12 from ∆ using discrete unit resolution. Hence, discrete unit resolution is more complete than Boolean unit resolution in this case. A variant binarization was discussed in [ 16 ] in the context of using algorithms for computing prime implicants of Boolean formulas to compute prime implicants for discrete formulas. This variant is based on reprenseting a discrete literal xS using the Boolean term 

∧ 

> i̸∈ S

xi instead of the Boolean clause ∨ 

> i∈S

xi since the two are equivalent given exactly-one constraints. If we apply this technique to the discrete CNF ∆ above, we get the formula 

([ x2 · x4] + [ y3 · y4]) · (x1) · (x3) · (x1 + x2 + x3 + x4) · (y1 + y2 + y3 + y4) ·

(x1 + x2) · (x1 + x3) · (x1 + x4) · (x2 + x3) · (x2 + x4) · (x3 + x4) ·

(y1 + y2) · (y1 + y3) · (y1 + y4) · (y2 + y3) · (x2 + x4) · (x3 + x4),

which contains the unit clauses x1 and x3. The above formula is not a CNF though. But we can unfold the component ([ x2 · x4] + [ y3 · y4]) into (x2 + y3) · (x2 + y4) · (x4 + y3) · (x4 + y4)

to obtain a Boolean CNF, ∆′

> b

. Unit resolution will now tigger on CNF ∆′ 

> b

which allows us to derive the clause x2 + x4 but not y1 + y2. We cannot refute ∆′ 

> b

· y1 · y2 using unit resolution either. Again, discrete unit resolution is more complete in this case. Both binarization techniques discussed above lead to Boolean CNFs whose size is quadratic in the cardinalities of discrete variables. Moreover, for the second binarization technique, a discrete clause of length l leads to a number of Boolean clauses that is exponential in l.Despite this considerable increase in CNF size, Boolean unit resolution is not as complete its discrete counterpart. This further illustrates the merit of treating discrete CNFs natively. Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 21 

# B Data Structures and Additional Pseudocode 

The main objects in the Dsat solver are CNF-state, clause, variable, literal and state. The main attributes of these objects are described below. CNF-state Π attributes: 

Π.vCount : Number of variables in CNF. 

Π.var : Array of variable objects. 

Π.dLevel : Decision level, initially 0 and incremented each time a decision is made. 

Π.uClauses : The unit clauses in the input CNF. 

Π.clauses : The non-unit clauses in the input CNF. 

Π.cClause : Conflict clause, set by resolution when a contradiction is found and later used by the clause learning algorithm. 

Π.pTime : Integer that keeps track of state pruning time at each decision level (for computing state falsification time). Initialized at each decision level, and incremented when a literal is derived at that level. 

Π.pVars : List of pairs ⟨V, I ⟩ where V is a variable and I represents a set states of V. 

Used to save active states of variables at each decision level (for rolling back CNF state). 

Π.tStack : Stack for saving Π.pTime at each decision level (for rolling back CNF state). 

Π.vStack : Stack for saving Π.pVars at each decision level (for rolling back CNF state). 

Π.aCount : Number of variables in the conflict clause that have states pruned at the conflict level. This is used by the clause learning algorithm. Variable V attributes: 

V. aStates : Integer representing the active states of variable V. V. lStack : Stack that holds decision levels at which states of variable V were pruned. 

V. cStates : The states of variable V in the current conflict clause. This is used by the clause learning algorithm and it implicitly means that the conflict clause has a V -literal with states V. cStates . If V. cStates = 0 , variable V does not appear in the conflict clause. 

V. lastcState : The state in V. cStates that was pruned last. Clause β attributes: 

β. literals : Literals of clause β. 

Literal ℓ attributes: 

ℓ. var : The variable of literal ℓ. ℓ. states : Integer representing the states of literal ℓ (some active, some pruned). 

ℓ. watchedBy : The clauses watching literal ℓ. 

State s attributes: 

s.pLevel : The decision level at which state s was pruned. 

s.pTime : The time at which state s was pruned (time is local to a decision level). 

s.reason : The reason for pruning state s (a clause or nil ). 

s.watchedBy : The literals watching state s (all such literals must be watched by clauses). To leverage efficient bit-wise operations, a set of states is internally represented in Dsat 

as an array of integers, which we refer to as an integer for simplicity. When iterating over the states represented by integer I in the paper, we write “for s ∈ I.” In this appendix, we flesh this out to “for i ∈ On-Bits (I), s ← V. state [i] which iterates over the indices of states in I, then recovers the state object from its variable object. 22 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

Algorithm 4 Constructing CNF state with Watched States and Literals  

> 1:

function CNF-State (Σ, ∆) ▷ see Dsat for definition of Σ, ∆ 

> 2:

Π ← new CNF object ▷ fields not initialized: pTime , pVars , cClause  

> 3:

Π.vCount ← | Σ| ▷ number of variables  

> 4:

Π.var ← array of size |Σ| ▷ maps variable index to variable object  

> 5:

Π.clauses ← [] ▷ list of non-unit clauses  

> 6:

Π.uClauses ← [] ▷ list of literals corresponding to unit clauses  

> 7:

Π.dLevel ← 0 ▷ decision level  

> 8:

Π.tStack ← ⟨ 0⟩ ▷ stack with one entry for pTime (pruning time)  

> 9:

Π.vStack ← ⟨ [] ⟩ ▷ stack with one entry for pVars (properties of variables)  

> 10:

Π.bump ← 1 ▷ used to update scores for the decision heuristic  

> 11:

Π.bumpInc ← 1.05 ▷ how much to scale Π.bump at every conflict (configurable)  

> 12:

for each ⟨i, c ⟩ in Σ do ▷ construct variable and state objects  

> 13:

// i is a variable index, c is its cardinality  

> 14:

V ← new variable object ▷ fields not initialized: none  

> 15:

Π.var [i] ← V ▷ so we can retrieve a variable object based on its index  

> 16:

V. index ← i ▷ variable index  

> 17:

V. card ← c ▷ variable cardinality  

> 18:

V. score ← 0 ▷ variable activity score  

> 19:

V. aStates ← 2c − 1 ▷ integer representing active states of V (all active initially)  

> 20:

V. state ← array of size c ▷ maps state index to state object  

> 21:

V. literal ← hashmap ▷ maps integer to literal object  

> 22:

V. lStack ← empty stack ▷ used by Decide /Undecide  

> 23:

for j = 0 to c − 1 do ▷ construct state objects  

> 24:

s ← new state object ▷ fields not initialized: pLevel , pTime , reason  

> 25:

V. state [j] ← s ▷ so we can retrieve a state object based on its index  

> 26:

s.index ← j ▷ state indices start at 0 

> 27:

s.watchedBy ← {} ▷ multiple literals may watch a state  

> 28:

s.score ← 0 ▷ state activity score  

> 29:

for each clause β in ∆ do ▷ construct clause and literal objects  

> 30:

L ← [] ▷ literal objects for clause  

> 31:

for each ⟨i, I ⟩ in β do ▷ construct literal objects  

> 32:

// i is a variable index, I is an integer representing states  

> 33:

V ← Π.var [i] ▷ variable of literal  

> 34:

ℓ ← Get-Literal (V, I ) ▷ literal ℓ may have already existed  

> 35:

add ℓ to L 

> 36:

if L = [ ℓ] then add ℓ to Π.uClauses ▷ β is a unit clause  

> 37:

else  

> 38:

C ← Get-Clause (L, L [0] , L [1] , false ) ▷ watch two arbitrary literals in clause  

> 39:

add C to Π.clauses  

> 40:

return Π ▷ CNF-state object Y. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 23 

Algorithm 5 Functions for Clauses, Variables, Literals, States and Integers  

> 1:

function Implied? (ℓ) ▷ whether literal ℓ is implied  

> 2:

return ℓ. states & ℓ. var .aStates = ℓ. var .aStates ▷ bitwise operation  

> 1:

function Falsified? (ℓ) ▷ whether literal ℓ is falsified  

> 2:

return ℓ. states & ℓ. var .aStates = 0 ▷ bitwise operation  

> 1:

function Active-State (ℓ) ▷ returns an arbitrary active state in literal ℓ 

> 2:

i ← On-Bit (ℓ. states ) ▷ ℓ. states ̸ = 0  

> 3:

return ℓ. var .state [i] 

> 1:

function Pruned-After (s1, s2) ▷ whether state s1 was pruned after state s2 

> 2:

return s1.pLevel > s2.pLevel or ( s1.pLevel = s2.pLevel and s1.pTime > s2.pTime ) 

> 1:

function Fixed-State? (V ) ▷ whether variable has a single active state  

> 2:

return Single-On-Bit? (V. aStates ) ▷ bitwise operation  

> 1:

function Last-Pruned-State (V, I ) ▷ returns last pruned state in states I̸ = 0  

> 2:

s ← nil  

> 3:

for i ∈ On-Bits (I) do ▷ iterate over indices of on-bits in integer I 

> 4:

s′ ← V. state [i] 

> 5:

if s = nil or Pruned-After (s′, s) then  

> 6:

s ← s′ 

> 7:

return s 

> 1:

function Get-Literal (V, I ) ▷ variable V , integer I representing some states of V 

> 2:

ℓ ← V. literal [I] ▷ lookup literal  

> 3:

if ℓ̸ = nil then return ℓ ▷ a literal with states I already exists  

> 4:

ℓ ← new literal object ▷ fields not initialized: none  

> 5:

V. literal [I] ← ℓ ▷ cache literal ℓ so we do not reconstruct it  

> 6:

ℓ. var ← V 

> 7:

ℓ. states ← I ▷ an integer representing states of literal ℓ 

> 8:

ℓ. watchedBy ← {} ▷ a literal may be watched by multiple clauses  

> 9:

return ℓ 

> 1:

function Get-Clause (L, ℓ 1, ℓ 2, lclause ) ▷ L has ≥ 2 literals, lclause indicates a learned clause  

> 2:

C ← new clause object ▷ fields not initialized: none  

> 3:

C. literals ← L 

> 4:

for ℓ ∈ { ℓ1, ℓ 2} do ▷ watching literals and states  

> 5:

if ℓ. watchedBy is empty then ▷ clause C is the first to watch literal ℓ 

> 6:

j ← On-Bit (ℓ. states ) 

> 7:

add ℓ to ℓ. var .state [j].watchedBy ▷ watch arbitrary state in literal ℓ 

> 8:

add C to ℓ. watchedBy  

> 9:

return C 

> 1:

function On-Bit (I) ▷ integer I̸ = 0 (non-empty set of states)  

> 2:

return INT( log 2 I) ▷ most-significant on-bit in integer I 

> 1:

function On-Bits (I) ▷ integer I̸ = 0 (non-empty set of states)  

> 2:

return list of indices for on-bits in integer I 

> 1:

function Single-On-Bit? (I) ▷ whether integer I has a single on-bit  

> 2:

return (I > 0) and (I & ( I − 1) = 0) 24 Dsat : A Native SAT Solver for Discrete Logic 

Algorithm 6 Decision Heuristic  

> 1:

function Select-Literal (Π) 

> 2:

V ∗, t ∗ ← nil , − inf ▷ current best  

> 3:

for each variable V in Π do ▷ pick a variable to constrain with a decision  

> 4:

if Fixed-State? (V ) then Continue ▷ V has one active state  

> 5:

t ← V. score /|V. aStates | 

> 6:

if t > t ∗ then ▷ found a better variable  

> 7:

V ∗, t ∗ ← V, t  

> 8:

if V ∗ = nil then ▷ every variable has one active state or is no longer constrained  

> 9:

return (nil , nil ) 

> 10:

// aSum = sum of the scores of active states, sSum = sum of the scores of selected states  

> 11:

// while sSum ≤ 0.3 ∗ aSum , keep selecting the active state with the highest score  

> 12:

// I represents the selected states  

> 13:

return ⟨V ∗, I ⟩ 

> 1:

function Update-Score (V, I, Π) ▷ bumping variable and state scores in the VSIDS style  

> 2:

for i ∈ On-Bits (I) do ▷ states I (integer) of variable V are pruned  

> 3:

increment V. states [i].score by Π.bump  

> 4:

increment V. score by Π.bump ∗ (|I. states |/V. card ) ▷ |I. states | is number of states IY. Zhang, K. Zhou, A. Darwiche 25 

# C Experimental Results on Memory Usage 

Figure 4 depicts the memory usage (maximum memory used by the process) for the three experiments in Section 5. According to the results in this figure, Dsat scales better overall than the other solvers in terms of memory usage. The results for Cadical with the sequential counters encoding are plotted (the pairwise encoding generates a lot more clauses when variables have large cardinality). On the random 3-CNFs, Dsat uses slightly more memory than PicatSAT but the difference changes very little as variable cardinality increases. For the last two experiments, Dsat uses less memory overall, compared to the other solvers, and the advantages grows as problem complexity increases.