Title: Governing Dynamic Capabilities: Cryptographic Binding and Reproducibility Verification for AI Agent Tool Use

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.14332v2

Published Time: Mon, 23 Mar 2026 00:08:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Governing Dynamic Capabilities: Cryptographic Binding and Reproducibility Verification for AI Agent Tool Use 

Ziling Zhou Genupixel Technology Pte. Ltd. 

ziling@genupixel.com 

# Abstract 

AI agents now dynamically acquire tools, orchestrate sub-agents, and transact across organizational boundaries—yet no existing security layer can verify what an agent is capa-ble of, whether it executed what it claims, or what actually happened in a multi-agent interaction. We trace this gov-ernance vacuum to a missing architectural distinction: the 

capability-context separation . Inside a transformer’s forward pass, tool definitions and user context are indis-tinguishable token sequences; at the orchestration layer, they have fundamentally different security semantics— tool definitions determine which real-world actions are 

possible (and change infrequently), while runtime context determines which actions are chosen (and changes per interaction). Existing frameworks conflate the two, en-abling silent capability escalation —agents acquiring tools without invalidating credentials—and leaving cross-agent interactions without verifiable provenance. From this principle, we derive three Agent Gover-nance Requirements : capability integrity (G1) governs the capability envelope, behavioral verifiability (G2) en-sures agents executed their declared computational pro-cess, and interaction auditability (G3) provides tamper-evident records for the runtime context—together defin-ing what an agent ecosystem must enforce, independent of how . We prove two structural results with prescrip-tive architectural consequences: the Chain Verifiabil-ity Theorem , establishing that behavioral verification is a chain property (one unverifiable interior agent breaks end-to-end verification for all downstream nodes), and the Bounded Divergence Theorem , which transforms replay-based verification into a probabilistic safety certifi-cate ( ϵ ≤ 1 − α1/n ). We validate the framework with two crypto-agnostic instantiations—basic (Ed25519, SHA-256, hash chains; 97 μs verify) and enhanced (BBS+ selective disclosure, Groth16 DV-SNARK; 13.8 ms verify)—both satisfying the same nine security properties. A multi-provider reproducibility study (9 models, 7 providers) reveals 5.8× variance in inference determinism, directly connecting model characteristics to governance architec-ture. End-to-end evaluation over 5–20 agent pipelines with real LLM calls confirms <0.02% governance over-head, real-time detection of 7 end-to-end attack scenarios (covering G1, G2, and G3) with zero false positives, and post-hoc forensic tracing of runtime behavioral attacks validated against the Nemotron-AIQ dataset. 

# 1 Introduction 

1.1 Agent Governance: A Missing Foun-dation 

AI agents are no longer isolated tools. Through protocols like MCP [ 8 ] and A2A [ 9], modern agents dynamically discover tools, invoke external APIs, and orchestrate other agents at runtime. As these agents assume real-world responsibilities—managing credentials, executing finan-cial transactions, accessing sensitive data—a fundamental question emerges: what properties must an agent ecosys-tem satisfy for humans to trust it? 

This question has been raised from multiple directions: regulatory mandates for traceability and conformity as-sessment (EU AI Act, Articles 12, 43, 72), standards initiatives identifying security controls and governance oversight [ 27 , 29 ], and research calling for secure interac-tion protocols [ 12 ], transparency [ 44 ], formal safety prop-erties [ 45 ], and operational safety frameworks [ 46 ]. Yet 

no existing framework translates these aspirations into enforceable cryptographic infrastructure . This is a fundamental architectural gap : current agents acquire tools dynamically, execute arbitrary models, and interact without verifiable records. We propose three Agent Governance Requirements —the 

minimum conditions under which an agent ecosystem can be considered governed :

Definition 1 (Agent Governance Requirements) . A gov-erned agent ecosystem satisfies three properties: 

G1: Capability Integrity. Every agent’s identity is cryptographically bound to its complete capability set—the model it executes and every tool it can invoke. The identity is unforgeable and non-repudiable. Any change to the capability set invalidates existing credentials and requires explicit re-authorization by a human or organizational principal. 

> arXiv:2603.14332v2 [cs.CR] 19 Mar 2026

Table 1: Governance gap analysis: undefended attacks when one or two governance requirements are absent. ATK-9 (blame shifting) requires both G2 and G3 for full resolution. All 12 attacks are defined in §2. 

Missing Undefended Attacks #

Single requirement absent 

¬G1 ATK-1,3,4,5,6,7 6

¬G2 ATK-2,9,12 3

¬G3 ATK-8,9,10,11 4

Two requirements absent 

¬G1, ¬G2 ATK-1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,12 9

¬G1, ¬G3 ATK-1,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 10 

¬G2, ¬G3 ATK-2,8,9,10,11,12 6G1 ∧G2 ∧G3 none 0

G2: Behavioral Verifiability (Inference Authen-ticity). An agent’s declared computational process can be independently verified—ensuring that the agent actu-ally executed what its credentials claim. This requirement is implementation-agnostic : it may be satisfied by hard-ware attestation, software-based replay, or zero-knowledge proofs. 

G3: Interaction Auditability. All inter-agent and agent-human interactions produce tamper-evident records sufficient for forensic reconstruction, allowing humans to audit agent behavior, attribute responsibility, and provide evidence for regulatory compliance and system improve-ment. 

These requirements reflect the consensus of legal [ 34 ,35 ], regulatory [ 27 ], and technical [ 12 , 29 , 44 , 45 , 46 ]communities. What is novel is the claim that all three must hold simultaneously and that none is achievable with existing infrastructure . Table 1 maps each requirement to the 12 attack scenarios in §2: no single requirement, nor any pair, suffices. Only G1 ∧G2 ∧G3 closes all 12 vectors. A critical corollary: even hardware TEEs [ 53 , 54 ,55 ] do not eliminate the need for G1 and G3 . A TEE-attested agent that silently acquires new tools re-mains a security threat (G1 violation); a TEE-attested pipeline without tamper-evident records remains unau-ditable (G3 violation). Our framework provides the gov-ernance layer that TEE, by itself, cannot. 

1.2 Why the Current Landscape Falls Short 

The current agent security landscape maps into four lay-ers (Figure 1), none satisfying G1–G3: Identity plat-forms [20 , 22 , 23 ] bind agents to keys but certificates remain valid after capability changes ( G1 violated ). Au-thorization frameworks [4, 3, 40 ] evaluate permissions at grant time without detecting drift ( G1 violated ). Run-time gateways [ 41 , 42 ] inspect tool calls statelessly ( G2, G3 violated ). Governance platforms [ 43 ] maintain reg-istries without cryptographic enforcement ( G1 violated ). Existing Landscape                

> Layer 1: Identity
> Who is this agent?
> Keyfactor, SPIFFE/SPIRE, CyberArk
> Layer 2: Authorization
> What may this agent access?
> OIDC-A, Authenticated Delegation, Cerbos
> CAPABILITY-IDENTITY GAP
> No layer detects capability change between authorization and enforcement
> Layer 3: Runtime Gateway
> Is this specic call permitted?
> Gravitee, Lasso Security, Cerbos MCP
> Layer 4: Governance
> Is this agent compliant?
> Credo AI, Sumsub KYA, CrowdStrike/SGNL
> Our Framework (A2Auth)
> Capability-Bound Certicates
> X.509 v3 + Skills Manifest Hash Trust Propagation Tree (NA →AG) 3  Bridges Identity ↔Authorization
> Reproducibility Commitments
> Replay Verication (Full / Statistical) Chain Veriability Theorem 4  Bridges Authorization ↔Enforcement
> Veriable Interaction Ledger
> Hash-Linked Signed Records Forensic Reconstruction + Audit 5  Bridges Enforcement ↔Governance
> Performance
> 97 μs cert verify ·<1 ns capability binding
> ∼0.62 ms overhead · ∼ 1,200,000 ×faster than BAID 12/12 attack scenarios detected/prevented
> End-to-End Validation
> 520 agent pipeline ·0.12% overhead Sub-linear per-agent scaling OAuth 2.1 + OTEL baselines detect 0/5 attacks

Figure 1: The four-layer agent security landscape and the capability-identity gap. Existing layers partially ad-dress individual requirements but none bridges them. Our framework provides the missing cryptographic governance layer satisfying G1–G3, validated end-to-end across 5–20 agent pipelines. The root cause is a failure to recognize a fundamental architectural distinction. Inside a transformer’s forward pass, tool definitions and user context are indistinguish-able token sequences; but at the orchestration layer, tool definitions determine which real-world actions are possible , while runtime context determines which actions are chosen . This yields the capability-context separation : the capability envelope (model identity, tool definitions, permission scopes) changes infrequently and re-quires re-authorization (G1); the runtime context (conver-sation history, user instructions) changes per-interaction and requires verifiability (G2) and auditability (G3). Existing frameworks conflate the two—a tool addition and a new user message are treated identically. On the capability side, this creates the capability-identity gap :no existing framework detects when an agent’s capabilities have changed , enabling silent capability escalation . On the context side, it means cross-agent interactions lack verifi-able provenance—no framework provides tamper-evident records linking which agent did what, with which inputs, producing which outputs —the foundation for accountabil-ity in multi-agent workflows. To our knowledge, the capability-context separation is the first architectural abstraction that explains why 

agent security frameworks systematically fail to address capability drift—and it is not merely descriptive but pre-scriptive : it dictates the governance boundaries any se-cure agent system must enforce. As a concrete illustra-tion, BAID [ 2 ] achieves strong code-level authentication via zkVM, binding agent identity to a program commit-ment CP = CommitProg (P ). Yet CP does not encompass dynamically acquired tools: an agent’s program binary remains unchanged when new tools are discovered via MCP [ 8] or plugin registries, leaving the entire capability envelope outside BAID’s security perimeter. This is not 2an implementation oversight but a direct consequence of designing without the capability-context separation—the framework conflates code identity with capability iden-tity. Our G1 requirement, derived from this abstraction, prescribes that governance must commit to the complete capability set (model + tools + permissions), not merely the executing code. 

1.3 Our Framework: Bridging the Gap 

The capability-context separation provides the foundation for three enforcement mechanisms that instantiate the governance contracts G1–G3: 

Capability-Bound Agent Certificates (§3) →

G1. We extend X.509 v3 with a skills manifest hash —a SHA-256 commitment to the agent’s complete tool configuration—embedded within a trust propagation tree 

where human principals form the roots and trust con-straints propagate monotonically downward. 

Inference Authenticity (§4) → G2. Two paths: hardware (TEE attestation [ 53 , 54 ]) and soft-ware (reproducibility-based replay leveraging LLM infer-ence near-determinism [ 1, 6]—a verifier re-executes with recorded inputs and flags divergence beyond the agent’s declared threshold). 

Verifiable Interaction Ledger (§5) → G3. Inter-action records containing agent IDs, certificate hashes, content commitments, and reproducibility anchors are linked by a hash chain with per-record signatures, storing only cryptographic commitments to preserve privacy. Together, these mechanisms provide a stateful, crypto-graphic governance layer satisfying G1–G3. 

Crypto-agnostic design. G1–G3 define what to en-force, not how . The framework is crypto-agnostic : each requirement specifies a functional contract with pluggable cryptographic primitives—analogous to TLS cipher suite negotiation. We present a basic instantiation (Ed25519, SHA-256, hash chains; ∼97 μs verification) and an en-hanced instantiation (BBS+ selective disclosure for G1, DV-SNARK zero-knowledge verification for G2; 13.8 ms). Both satisfy G1–G3 with identical security semantics, dif-fering only in privacy properties and cost. This separation of governance logic from cryptographic mechanism demon-strates that agent governance is a composable architecture 

where organizations select backends matching their threat model. 

1.4 Threat Model and Security Guaran-tees 

We consider a PPT adversary who can compromise up to k agent nodes, create malicious agents, inject or mod-ify tools, manipulate network traffic (Dolev-Yao model), and perform silent capability escalation ; it cannot com-promise non-agent nodes or break standard cryptographic primitives. Under this model, we establish seven secu-rity properties and two structural theorems: Capability Binding (Property 4), Trust Containment (Property 3), 

Chain Integrity (Property 5), and Delegation Depth (Prop-erty 6) enforce G1; Reproducibility Soundness (Property 7), 

Bounded Divergence (Theorem 3), and Chain Verifiability 

(Theorem 4) enforce G2; Credential Isolation (Property 8) and Ledger Integrity (Property 9) enforce G3. 

1.5 Contributions 

Our contribution is a new governance architecture —identifying what must be governed, where governance boundaries belong, and why a specific composition is both necessary and sufficient—not new cryptographic primitives. This follows the pattern of Certificate Trans-parency [ 56 ], which composed Merkle trees and gossip protocols (both well-known) into infrastructure that funda-mentally changed web PKI operation. The insight was in identifying what to compose and where to deploy it , not in new primitives; CT was published at IEEE S&P precisely because the architectural contribution—public auditability of CA behavior—was independently valuable. We make an analogous claim: the capability-context separation, the three governance requirements, and the structural results that connect them are independently valuable regardless of the specific cryptographic instantiation. Concretely: 

1. A new vulnerability class and architectural ab-straction. We identify silent capability escalation —agents acquiring or modifying tools at runtime without triggering existing security mechanisms (§1.2)—and trace it to the 

capability-context separation : tool definitions and user context are indistinguishable inside a transformer but have fundamentally different security semantics at the orchestration layer [ 57 , 58 ]. To our knowledge, this is the first architectural abstraction that identifies where 

governance boundaries must be placed in agent systems and why existing frameworks—including those with strong cryptographic foundations [ 2]—systematically miss capa-bility drift. 

2. Structural results with architectural con-sequences. The Chain Verifiability Theorem 

(§4.9) shows that a single unverifiable interior agent breaks end-to-end behavioral verification, prescribing high-determinism models at interior trust-tree positions. The Bounded Divergence Theorem (§4.8) estab-lishes that an adversary passing n replay checks is (n, ϵ )-indistinguishable from the declared model ( ϵ ≤ 1 − α1/n ), framing software G2 as a probabilistic approximation of TEE. The Agent Governance Trilemma (§8.2) proves that capability, performance, and security cannot be si-multaneously maximized for Turing-complete agents (via Rice’s theorem). 

3. Empirical discovery connecting model deter-minism to chain security. A reproducibility study (9 models, 7 providers, 15,120 comparisons) reveals 5.8×

variance in inference determinism, which—combined with Chain Verifiability—determines which trust-tree positions a model qualifies for. 

4. Two crypto-agnostic instantiations. Basic (Ed25519, SHA-256; 97 μs) and enhanced (BBS+, DV-SNARK; 13.8 ms) instantiations both satisfy nine security 3properties (§6). End-to-end evaluation over 5–20 agent pipelines with real LLM calls confirms <0.02% governance overhead and real-time detection of 7 E2E attack scenarios (covering G1, G2, and G3) with zero false positives (§7.5). An additional 9 structural governance attacks are vali-dated as automated unit tests, and 3 runtime behavioral attacks are validated via post-hoc forensic tracing against Nemotron-AIQ traces (§7). 

# 2 Threat Model and Motivating Attacks 

2.1 System Model 

We model the trust infrastructure as a rooted directed tree T = ( V, E, r, τ ), where V is the set of all entities (CAs, humans, organizations, AI agents), E is the set of certificate issuance relationships, r is the root CA, and 

τ : V → { NA , AG } classifies each node as Non-Agent (NA ) or Agent ( AG ). The tree satisfies a structural type constraint : τ (u) = 

AG =⇒ ∀(u, v ) ∈ E : τ (v) = AG . Agents can delegate to sub-agents, but cannot confer trust upon humans or legal entities. Each agent node v holds a Capability-Bound Certificate 

cert v and maintains a runtime tool configuration Tv (t)

that may change over time. Each credential c has a risk tier tier c ∈ { T 0, T 1, T 2, T 3} where T 0 (human-only) is most sensitive. 

2.2 Adversary Model 

We define a PPT adversary A with capabilities: C1: Network Control (Dolev-Yao). C2: Agent Com-promise of up to k agent nodes. C3: Rogue Agent Creation with fresh key pairs. C4: Silent Capabil-ity Escalation —modifying tool configurations without changing identity credentials. C5: Interaction Injec-tion —fabricating or modifying ledger records. 

A cannot : compromise non-agent nodes, forge digital signatures (EUF-CMA), find hash collisions, or reverse hash functions. 

2.3 Motivating Attack Scenarios 

We enumerate twelve attacks organized into four cate-gories. ATK-1 through ATK-9 address structural gover-nance threats; ATK-10 through ATK-12 address runtime behavioral attacks empirically validated by the Nemotron-AIQ dataset [ 46 ], which demonstrates 100% success rates for prompt injection and tool-mediated attacks against unprotected agentic workflows. 

Capability Attacks. ATK-1: Silent Capability Es-calation. Agent v certified with {code_gen , unit_test }

acquires web_browser via a plugin marketplace. Under every existing framework, v’s credentials remain valid. Our framework detects the skills manifest hash change. 

ATK-2: Model Substitution. A replaces the certified model with a fine-tuned variant. Detected via G2: hard-ware TEE attestation (deterministic), software replay ver-ification divergence, or DV-SNARK CharMatch failure. 

ATK-3: Tool Trojanization. A replaces tool implemen-tation (same name/version, different code). Detected via code-level hashing in the skills manifest. 

Delegation Attacks. ATK-4: Phantom Delegation. 

Compromised agent (T2) issues T1 certificate to sub-agent. Prevented by monotonic trust propagation. ATK-5: Chain Forgery. Fabricated certificate chain. Prevented by signa-ture verification at every level. ATK-6: Depth Overflow. 

Deep delegation hierarchy. Prevented by strictly decreas-ing depth counters. ATK-7: Credential Collusion. Two or more compromised agents at lower tiers (e.g., T3 +T3) attempt to combine their credentials to access resources restricted to a higher tier (T1). Prevented by indepen-dent per-agent credential evaluation—each agent’s tier and permissions are verified in isolation, so colluding agents gain no additional permissions beyond their individual certificates (Property 8). 

Forensic Attacks. ATK-8: Evidence Tampering. Log modification after incident. Prevented by hash-linked ledger with bilateral signing. ATK-9: Blame Shifting. 

Dispute in multi-agent chain. Resolved via interaction commitments and reproducibility replay. 

Runtime Behavioral Attacks. ATK-10: Injection-Driven Knowledge Poisoning. Adversarial content in-jected via tool outputs (e.g., retrieval results) propagates through the agent’s reasoning chain, corrupting final out-puts. Nemotron-AIQ traces show this attack succeeds in 100% of undefended trials across knowledge-poisoning and phishing-link templates. Our ledger’s content com-mitments ( ηin , η out ) enable post-hoc identification of the exact span where poisoned content entered the chain. 

ATK-11: Cascading Action Hijack. Injected instruc-tions persist across multiple agent workflow stages (IN-FECT template), causing the agent to refuse legitimate tasks or produce harmful content at downstream nodes. Our hash-chain ledger records every inter-span transition, enabling forensic tracing of attack propagation paths that OTEL-only audit trails cannot reliably provide. 

ATK-12: Output Exfiltration via Rendering. Agent outputs are manipulated to embed phishing links (PHISH-ING_LINK) or malicious markdown (MARKDOWN) that exfiltrate data when rendered by downstream consumers. Detected post-hoc via reproducibility verification: replay-ing the interaction with the committed parameters pro-duces benign output, diverging from the tampered record. 

# 3 Capability-Bound Agent Certifi-cates 

3.1 Certificate Structure 

Definition 2 (Capability-Bound Certificate) . ACapability-Bound Certificate for node v is: 

cert v = ( id v , id par (v), pk v , μ v , σ v , κ v , ρ v , t s, t e, sig )

4Trust Propagation Tree with Monotonic Constraint Decay            

> NA (Non-Agent: human, org, CA) AG (Agent) Issues certificate ( κdecays) Forbidden (AG →NA)
> Root CA
> NA · T0 · d=8
> Org-Acme
> NA · T2 · d=5
> T0 →T2, d: 8 →5
> User-Alice
> NA · T2 · d=4
> User-Bob
> NA · T2 · d=3
> A1-coder
> AG · T2 · d=2 {code_gen, test}
> A2-review
> AG · T2 · d=2 {code_review}
> A3-orch
> AG · T2 · d=2 {plan, delegate}
> A6-data
> AG · T3 · d=1 {sql_query}
> A4-api
> AG · T3 · d=0 {rest_call}
> A5-monitor
> AG · T3 · d=0 {log_read} AG →NA ✗
> Constraint Decay
> Root: T0, d=8
> ↓strict subset Org: T2, d=5
> ↓strict subset User: T2, d=4
> ↓strict subset A3: T2, d=2 →A4: T3, d=0 d=0 ⇒no further delegation Fig. 3. Trust propagation tree for the evaluation environment. NA nodes (rectangles) form the trust anchor; AG nodes (rounded) are agents. Constraints decay monotonically. AG →NA edges are structurally forbidden.

Figure 2: Trust propagation tree for the evaluation envi-ronment. NA nodes (rectangles) form the trust anchor; AG nodes (rounded) are agents. Constraints decay mono-tonically downward. 

where μv = (provider , model _id , model _ver ) is the model binding , σv = {(sid i, ver i, h i, P i)}ni=1 

is the skills manifest , κv =(max _tier , max _depth , allowed _models , max _rate )

are trust constraints , and ρv = ( level , config ) is the 

reproducibility commitment .

3.2 Skills Manifest and Capability Bind-ing 

Definition 3 (Skills Manifest Hash) .

Hcert 

v = SHA -256(canonical( {(sid i, ver i, h i, P i)}ni=1 )) 

At runtime: Hv (t) = SHA -256(canonical( Sv (t))) .

Capability Binding Invariant. Access permitted only if Hv (t) = Hcert 

v . Any capability change invalidates access. Crucially, runtime context changes (memories, preferences) do not affect Hv (t)—the practical conse-quence of capability-context separation. For open-source tools, hi is the SHA-256 hash of source code. For closed-source tools, hi is the hash of the public configuration descriptor (name, version, API schema). 

3.3 Trust Propagation Tree 

Definition 4 (Trust Constraint Ordering) . κa ≤κ κb

iff κa.max _tier ≤ κb.max _tier , κa.max _depth <κb.max _depth (strict), κa.allowed _models ⊆

κb.allowed _models , and κa.max _rate ≤ κb.max _rate .

Trust Propagation Rule. For every edge (u, v ) ∈ E:

κv ≤κ κu.

3.4 Certificate Verification Algorithm 

When agent v requests access to credential c at time t,the verifier executes four phases (Figure 3): 

1 function Verify ( chain , credential , skills , roots ) : 

2 // Phase 1: Chain Integrity 

3 if chain [0]. issuer /∈ roots : return DENY 

4 for i in 1.. len ( chain ) : Certificate Verification and Governance Flow Agent v                

> Model: claude-sonnet-4 Tools: {code_gen, test} Cert: cert_v (T2, d=2) H_v(t) = SHA-256(skills) MCP call
> A2Auth Governance Layer Phase 1: Chain Integrity
> Verify root ∈trusted_roots
> ∀i: VerifySig(pk_{i-1}, sig_i)
> ∀i: now ∈[t_s, t_e] ∧ κ _i ≤ κ _{i-1}
> Phase 2: Capability Binding
> H_v(t) == H_v^cert ? (runtime hash vs certificate hash)
> Phase 3: Trust Check
> ⑤credential.tier ≤cert_v.max_tier
> ⑤agent_depth ≤max_depth
> Phase 4: Record & Allow
> ⑤Append interaction record (hash-link + Ed25519 sign + persist)
> ALLOW
> MCP Tool Server
> DENY
> sig_verify temporal constraint_monotonicity
> DENY
> capability_binding
> DENY
> tier_check ~97 μs <1 ns ~0.02 μs ~448 μs
> Total:
> ~0.62 ms
> Post-hoc Verification
> Replay inference with same (model, context, seed) TokenMatch ≥ θ = 0.98 audit trigger Fig. 2. Verification flow for an MCP tool call through the A2Auth governance layer. Each phase can independently reject with a specific reason. Post-hoc replay verification (dashed) is triggered by audit or incident investigation.

Figure 3: Verification flow for an MCP tool call through the A2Auth governance layer. Each phase can indepen-dently reject with a specific reason. 

5 if not VerifySig ( chain [i -1]. pk , chain [ i ]. sig ) : return DENY 

6 if chain [ i ]. κ̸ ≤κ chain [i -1]. κ: return DENY 

7 // Phase 2: Capability Binding 

8 if SHA256 ( canonical ( skills ) ) ̸ = cert_v . σ _hash : return DENY 

9 // Phase 3: Trust Constraint Check 

10 if credential . tier > cert_v . κ. max_tier : return DENY 

11 // Phase 4: Revocation Check 

12 if IsRevoked ( cert_v ) : return DENY 

13 return ALLOW 

3.5 Enhanced G1: Selective Disclosure via BBS+ Signatures 

The basic G1 instantiation (Ed25519 + SHA-256) requires 

full disclosure : a verifier must see the entire skills manifest to recompute the hash and check capability binding. This suffices for single-organization deployments but is prob-lematic in cross-organizational settings where revealing the full tool manifest leaks competitive intelligence (e.g., which proprietary tools an agent uses, its model version, or its rate limits). 

BBS+ signatures [ 51 ] enable a strictly stronger prop-erty: an agent can prove that its certificate is valid and that specific capability predicates hold, without revealing the full certificate contents . BBS+ is a W3C Verifiable Credentials standard primitive with security reducing to the q-SDH assumption in bilinear groups [52]. 

Definition 5 (BBS+ Capability Certificate) . The issuer signs the certificate attributes as a vector of L messages: 

m = ( m1, . . . , m L) = ( id v , pk v , μ v , h 1, . . . , h n, κ v , ρ v , t s, t e)

producing a BBS+ signature Σ = ( A, e, s ) over m.

Selective disclosure. To prove capability binding to a verifier, the agent derives a zero-knowledge proof of knowledge π that: 1. The agent possesses a valid BBS+ signature Σ from a trusted issuer. 52. The revealed subset mR ⊂ m (e.g., only the tool IDs, not model version or rate limits) matches the disclosed values. 3. The hidden attributes mH = m \ mR satisfy de-clared predicates (e.g., max _tier ≥ 2, model ∈{gpt-4o , claude-4 }). The verifier learns only the revealed attributes and the predicate outcomes—not the hidden values. This enables scenarios such as: an agent proves it has some valid tool manifest without revealing which tools; or proves its trust tier exceeds a threshold without revealing its exact tier or delegation depth. 

Capability binding under BBS+. The capabil-ity binding invariant is preserved: at runtime, the agent recomputes Hv (t) = SHA -256 ( canonical (Sv (t))) and in-cludes a ZKP that Hv (t) matches the committed hash in the signed message vector. Any tool change invalidates the proof. 

Cost-privacy tradeoff. BBS+ selective disclosure proof generation costs ∼14 .7 ms and verification ∼13 .8 ms (benchmarked in §7), compared to ∼97 μs for basic Ed25519 verification—a ∼142 × overhead. This is the concrete cost of privacy: the governance contract (G1) is identical; the privacy properties differ. Deployments choose between basic and enhanced G1 based on whether cross-organizational privacy justifies the latency cost. Cru-cially, these costs apply per-request only when selective disclosure is needed; for routine intra-organizational use, the basic instantiation suffices. 

Security. BBS+ signature unforgeability reduces to the q-SDH assumption in Type-3 bilinear groups; the zero-knowledge property reduces to DDH. Both are standard assumptions with well-studied cryptanalytic history. The enhanced instantiation inherits all nine security properties of the basic instantiation, with the additional property of certificate privacy : no PPT verifier can extract hidden attributes from a selective disclosure proof. 

3.6 Integration with A2A Agent Cards 

Agent Certificates are designed as non-invasive extensions of the A2A ecosystem via an optional extensions field in the Agent Card containing the certificate PEM, chain, and skills manifest hash. The enhanced instantiation adds a disclosure_mode field ( full or selective ) and, for selective disclosure, the BBS+ proof π replacing the raw certificate. 

# 4 Inference Authenticity and Re-producibility 

4.1 G2 as Inference Authenticity 

G2 requires inference authenticity : verifying that an agent actually executed its declared model on the recorded in-puts. This is an abstract governance requirement, indepen-dent of how it is achieved. Three implementation paths exist, each with distinct trust assumptions: 

Hardware attestation (TEE). Trusted execution en-vironments [ 53 , 54 ] guarantee that the declared code was what actually executed. This provides the strongest G2 guarantee—deterministic, not probabilistic—but requires specialized hardware infrastructure (Intel SGX/TDX [ 53 ], ARM TrustZone [ 54 ], NVIDIA H100 Confidential Com-puting [ 55 ]) that is unavailable in most current LLM API deployments. TEE satisfies G2 but does not satisfy G1 or G3 : a TEE-attested agent can still silently acquire tools (G1 violation), and TEE provides per-execution integrity without tamper-evident cross-agent audit trails (G3 viola-tion). Our framework provides the governance layer that TEE alone cannot. 

Software replay verification. When TEE is unavailable—the dominant case for cloud-hosted LLM APIs—G2 can be approximated through reproducibility-based replay : re-execute the agent’s declared model on recorded inputs and compare outputs. This provides a probabilistic software approximation of TEE, with guar-antees formalized in Property 1 and Theorem 1. The approximation quality improves with the verification bud-get n.

Zero-knowledge verification (DV-SNARK, §4.10). A privacy-preserving variant of replay veri-fication: the prover demonstrates output consistency without revealing prompts or outputs. This adds privacy guarantees to the software path at the cost of computational overhead. 

Full-inference zkVM [ 2 ]. A SNARK circuit over the complete transformer forward pass provides the strongest software G2 guarantee—computational integrity with-out TEE hardware—by cryptographically binding the agent’s execution to its registered code commitment 

CP = CommitProg (P ). This path is appropriate for high-assurance scenarios (e.g., financial settlement, regu-lated environments) where the proof generation overhead (∼120 s per interaction) is acceptable and provider re-execution cooperation is unavailable. Unlike the software replay path, this path does not require model re-execution by the verifier; the proof is self-contained. All four paths satisfy the same G2 governance contract. The framework is agnostic to which path is used; the choice is declared in the agent’s certificate ( ρv ) and recorded in the ledger, making the G2 implementation transparent to auditors and downstream agents. 

4.2 Reproducibility as a Necessary Con-dition for Software G2 

For the software path, a key observation applies: be-havioral verifiability is impossible without repro-ducibility . If an agent’s outputs cannot be indepen-dently regenerated—even approximately—then no post-hoc mechanism can distinguish authorized behavior from unauthorized behavior. This is a fundamental constraint on any software-based verification scheme. This observation has a prescriptive implication for se-cure agent system design: high-assurance deployments 

6without TEE must be engineered for reproducible output. Concretely, this means using deterministic sam-pling (temperature =0, fixed seeds), preferring structured outputs (code, JSON, SQL) over free-form prose where security-critical decisions are involved, and selecting in-ference providers that guarantee bitwise or near-bitwise reproducibility [ 6 ]. Agents that cannot commit to any reproducibility level receive a trust tier downgrade (§4.5), making the security cost of non-reproducibility explicit in the governance framework. More broadly, by making reproducibility a prerequisite for software G2 compliance, our framework transforms it from an implementation detail into a security-critical model performance metric —with implications for how models are specified, evaluated, and deployed (§4.9). 

4.3 Empirical Foundation 

LLM inference is nearly deterministic . Karvonen et al. [ 1 ]demonstrated that with fixed sampling parameters, regen-erating output produces >98% token-identical sequences. EigenAI [ 6 ] achieved 100% bit-exact deterministic infer-ence on fixed GPU architectures with negligible perfor-mance loss. Our own validation (§7, Experiment 5) con-firms that code-generating agents achieve perfect determin-ism, while prose outputs exhibit paraphrase-level variation that remains well-separated from cross-model divergence. 

4.4 Reproducibility as a Trust Primitive 

Definition 6 (Reproducibility Commitment) . ρv =(level , config ) where level ∈ { full , statistical , none }.

Full (level = full ): ∀(context , seed ) :

Ov (context , seed ) = Oreplay  

> v

(context , seed ).

Statistical (level = statistical ): 

∀(context , seed ) : CharMatch( Ov , O replay  

> v

) ≥ θ

The threshold θ is task-type dependent: our empirical validation (Experiment 5, §7) shows that code-generating agents achieve perfect determinism ( θ = 0 .98 ), while prose-generating agents require θ = 0 .10 to account for paraphrase-level variation. Cross-provider mean Char-Match ( 0.114 , Table 5) remains well below even the relaxed threshold. 

None : No reproducibility commitment. 

4.5 Reproducibility and Trust Tier Inter-action 

Reproducibility commitments interact with credential gov-ernance through a trust bonus : agents with no repro-ducibility commitment are downgraded one tier (T1 →T2, T2 →T3). This makes the governance cost of non-reproducibility explicit: an agent that cannot be verified post-hoc is inherently less trustworthy, regardless of its other credentials. 

4.6 Replay-Based Verification Protocol                                              

> 1function ReplayVerify ( cert , record , O_orig ) :
> 2ρ:= cert . ρ
> 3if ρ. level =none : return INCONCLUSIVE
> 4O_ref := ExecuteModel ( cert . μ,cert . σ,
> 5record . input , record . seed , ρ. config )
> 6if ρ. level =full :
> 7return O_ref == O_orig ?VERIFIED :VIOLATION
> 8else : // statistical
> 9return CharMatch ( O_ref , O_orig ) ≥θ?
> 10 VERIFIED :VIOLATION

4.7 Security Analysis 

Property 1 (Reproducibility Soundness, informal) . If compromised agent v executes model M ′̸ = M or skills 

S′̸ = S, replay verification detects the deviation with prob-ability ≥ 1 − ϵ(λ) for negligible ϵ.

By the DiFR token divergence result [ 1 ], the match rate between different models is δ ≈ 0.06 (character-level, validated in Experiment 5). Our empirical data (Table 6) shows that the fraction of cross-model output pairs ex-ceeding any reasonable threshold θ is at most q ≈ 0.02 

— i.e., a substituted model’s output coincidentally passes the CharMatch ≥ θ check with probability at most q per prompt. Over n independent verification prompts, the probability of all checks passing despite model substitution is at most qn, which is negligible for realistic n.

Input integrity for replay verification. Replay ver-ification requires the recorded input to be authentic. A compromised agent cannot fabricate its own input because the interaction ledger uses bilateral signing : the sender (an honest agent or non-agent) signs the input commitment 

ηin , which the compromised receiver cannot modify with-out invalidating the sender’s signature. G2 therefore relies on sender-authenticated input, not self-reported input—a unidirectional dependency on G3, not a circular one. The formal argument is given in Property 10 (§6). 

4.8 Indistinguishability Under Sufficient Verification 

A natural concern is adversarial fine-tuning: could an adversary produce a model M ′ that passes reproducibil-ity checks on tested inputs but behaves maliciously on untested ones? We show that sufficient replay verification bounds the impact of any such attack. 

Definition 7 ((n, ϵ )-Indistinguishability) . Models M and 

M ′ are (n, ϵ )-indistinguishable under skill set S and prompt distribution D if, after M ′ passes replay verifi-cation on n independent prompts x1, . . . , x n ∼ D across skills in S:

Pr 

> x∼D

[CharMatch( M (x), M ′(x)) < θ ] ≤ ϵ

Theorem 1 (Bounded Divergence) . If adversary-controlled model M ′ passes replay verification (CharMatch 

≥ θ) on n independent prompts drawn from D across |S| 

skills, then M and M ′ are (n, ϵ )-indistinguishable with: 

ϵ ≤ 1 − α1/n 

7where α is the significance level. For small ϵ, this simplifies to ϵ ⪅ ln (1 /α )/n . Equivalently, for target failure-rate bound ϵ, the required verification budget is n ≥ ln (1 /α )/ϵ .

Proof sketch. Let p =Pr x∼D [ CharMatch (M (x), M ′(x)) < θ] be the true failure rate under M ′. Each verification trial 

Zi = 1[ CharMatch ≥ θ] is an independent Bernoulli (1 −p).Observing all n tests pass ( ∑ Zi = n), the likelihood is (1 − p)n. The exact one-sided Clopper-Pearson upper bound on p at confidence 1 − α is p ≤ 1 − α1/n .For practical computation: (1 − p)n ≤ α implies 

p ≤ 1 − α1/n ≈ ln (1 /α )/n when p is small. This is a distribution-free result: the bound depends only on the number of verification trials and the desired confidence level, not on the threshold θ itself. The role of θ is to define what constitutes a “pass” — a higher θ increases sensitivity (more failures for a substituted model) but also increases the false-positive rate for the legitimate model. Full proof in §6. 

Practical implications. Table 2 shows the failure-rate bound ϵ (i.e., the maximum fraction of deploy-ment prompts on which M ′ can diverge undetected) as a function of the verification budget n at 99% confidence (α = 0 .01 ): 

n ϵ bound Interpretation 10 0.369 Coarse screening 25 0.168 Moderate assurance 50 0.089 <10% divergent prompts 100 0.045 <5% divergent prompts 200 0.023 High assurance 500 0.009 <1% divergent prompts 

Table 2: Failure-rate bound ϵ at 99% confidence ( α = 0 .01 )for various verification budgets n, computed as ϵ = 1 −

0.01 1/n .A verification suite of 50 prompts per skill — opera-tionally feasible as a periodic audit — bounds the adver-sary’s undetected divergence to at most 8.9% of deploy-ment prompts with 99% confidence. Increasing to 200 prompts tightens this to 2.3%. 

Threshold calibration. The threshold θ must be calibrated per task type and model to balance detection sensitivity against the false-positive rate. Our empirical data (Experiment 5) shows that single-metric thresholds suffer from the bimodal output distribution: for code gen-eration, CharMatch is either > 0.95 (identical outputs) or 

< 0.5 (paraphrase variants), leaving no single θ that simul-taneously achieves low false positives and high detection. We therefore adopt a multi-metric ensemble : a prompt is flagged if any of four metrics (CharMatch, Jaccard word overlap, TF-IDF cosine, character n-gram cosine) falls below its respective per-metric optimal threshold (de-termined by Youden’s J statistic, Table 7 in §7). This ensemble approach improves detection robustness across task types, as each metric captures different aspects of v0: Human                                      

> Trust Anchor
> v1:Agent
> G2= full
> vk:Agent
> G2= none
> vk+1 :Agent
> G2= full
> vn:Agent
> G2= full
> signed signed signed signed
> · · ·
> Veriable Region Unveriable Region
> CVD (vn) = k
> Chain veriability breaks here
> G1 G2 G3
> Replay conrms v1's declared model produced its output. Input from v0is trusted.
> G1 G2 ×G3
> No replay possible. Could execute M′̸=Mk.Output o′
> kis unveriable .
> G1 G2 G3
> Replay conrms vk+1 (o′
> k) = ok+1 .But o′
> kmay dier from o∗
> k.
> Correct on corrupted input.
> Chain Veriability Theorem: Behavioral veriability is a chain property , not a node property. A single G2= none interior agent at position kbreaks verication for all downstream nodes vk+1 , . . . , v n.
> Implication: High-determinism models must be placed at interior trust tree positions (security constraint, not performance preference).

Figure 4: Chain Verifiability: a single G2 =none inte-rior agent at position k breaks behavioral verification for all downstream nodes, even if they individually sat-isfy G2 =full . The verifiable region extends only to CVD (vn) = k.output similarity (surface-form identity vs. semantic over-lap). 

Security interpretation. This transforms repro-ducibility from a detection mechanism into a safety certifi-cate : an adversary who fine-tunes M into M ′ that passes 

n diverse replay checks has produced a model that di-verges on at most an ϵ-fraction of deployment prompts, with ϵ decreasing as O( ln (1 /α )/n ). The adversary faces a dilemma: either M ′ behaves like M on most inputs (limiting the attack’s impact to at most an ϵ-fraction of requests), or M ′ diverges more broadly and will be caught with probability increasing in n.

4.9 Chain Verifiability 

The preceding analysis establishes that G2 can verify an individual agent’s computational process. A natural question arises: when agents form a multi-hop execution chain, is per-node verification sufficient for end-to-end behavioral verifiability? We show that it is not—behavioral verifiability is a chain property , not a node property— and that this observation has direct implications for trust tree architecture (Figure 4). 

The gap that G2 uniquely fills. G1+G3 together provide attribution integrity —we know who sent what to whom, and that no message was altered—but signing proves attribution, not computational fidelity. A compro-mised agent holding a valid certificate (G1 ✓) can execute an arbitrary model internally and sign the output (G3 ✓); every cryptographic check passes. Only G2 detects this at-tack by verifying that the declared computational process produced the observed output, providing a probabilistic approximation of trusted execution ( ϵ ≤ 1 − α1/n , Theo-rem 1) achievable purely in software. 

Why chain position matters. Now consider a trust tree execution chain v0 → v1 → · · · → vn, where v0 is a human principal (trust anchor) and each vi (i ≥ 1) is an agent node. Agent vj receives input from vj−1, processes it using its declared model, and passes output to vj+1 .Suppose vj is a compromised agent with G2 =none 

(either because it uses a low-determinism model or because 8G2 verification is not enforced). Then: 1. vj ’s output cannot be verified as originating from its declared model. 2. vj ’s output becomes vj+1 ’s input. Even if vj+1 satis-fies G2 =full , replay verification of vj+1 only proves that vj+1 faithfully processed the input it received— but that input itself is unverifiable. 3. By induction, all downstream nodes vj+1 , . . . , v n op-erate on data whose provenance cannot be crypto-graphically verified back to the trust anchor. 

Definition 8 (Chain Verifiability Depth) . For execution chain v0 → v1 → · · · → vn with v0 a non-agent trust anchor, define: 

CVD( vn) = min {j ≥ 1 : vj is an agent with ρvj .level = none }

with CVD (vn) = n if no such vj exists (fully verifiable chain). 

Theorem 2 (Chain Verifiability) . Let v0 → v1 → · · · → 

vn be an execution chain where v0 is a non-agent trust an-chor. If CVD (vn) = k < n , then for all i > k , the output of vi cannot be verified as originating from a legitimate computation chain rooted at v0, even if vi individually satisfies ρvi .level = full .

Proof sketch. By Definition 8, vk has ρ. level = none ,so no replay verification can confirm that vk’s declared model produced its output ok. Under the adversary model (§2), vk may have executed an arbitrary model M ′̸ = Mk

that produces output o′

> k

̸ = o∗ 

> k

(where o∗ 

> k

is the output the declared model would have produced). Agent vk+1 

receives o′ 

> k

as input. Even with ρvk+1 .level = full , replay verification confirms vk+1 (o′

> k

) = ok+1 , i.e., that vk+1 faith-fully processed o′

> k

. But o′ 

> k

may differ from o∗

> k

, so ok+1 is the correct computation on incorrect input. By induction on chain length, the same applies to all vi with i > k . Full proof in §6. 

Per-model reproducibility variance. Our multi-provider experiment (Experiment 5c, §7) reveals that model determinism varies by over an order of magnitude: from CharMatch =0.987 (Haiku 4.5) to 0.169 (Kimi K2.5). Combined with the Chain Verifiability Theorem, this trans-forms into prescriptive architectural guidance : the security of a multi-agent pipeline depends not just on whether G2 is enforced, but on where high- and low-determinism models are placed in the trust tree. 

Reproducibility as a model performance met-ric. The G1–G3 framework elevates reproducibility from an implementation detail to a first-class model per-formance metric : a model’s determinism directly de-termines which governance level it qualifies for (§8.2), which trust-tree positions it may occupy, and what ver-ification budget is needed (Theorem 1). We argue that providers should self-declare reproducibility char-acteristics —analogous to FIPS 140 security levels for cryptographic modules—including expected CharMatch ranges under temperature =0 and sensitivity to infras-tructure changes. Our empirical characterization across 9 models and 7 providers (Experiment 5) provides the first multi-provider basis for such specifications. 

Architectural implications. This theorem yields three deployment principles: 

Principle 1: High-determinism models at interior nodes. Models with strong reproducibility (Haiku: CharMatch =0.987, Sonnet: 0.823) occupy interior trust-tree positions; low-determinism models (Kimi: 0.169, DeepSeek: 0.225) are constrained to leaf positions—a 

security architecture constraint , not merely a perfor-mance recommendation. 

Principle 2: Verification boundary checkpoints. When a G2 =none agent must appear at an interior position, the chain requires a verification boundary—human-in-the-loop, TEE attestation, or dual-execution—to re-establish chain verifiability for downstream nodes. 

Principle 3: Explicit degradation in the ledger. When chain verifiability breaks at node vk, the ledger records a PARTIAL_VERIFIABILITY marker; downstream agents inherit a trust tier penalty, making the reduced guarantee visible to auditors. 

Relationship to TEE. The Chain Verifiability Theo-rem clarifies where G2 is needed: at every interior node. In mixed deployments, different nodes may use different G2 implementations (TEE, software replay, or DV-SNARK), with chain verifiability depth determined by the weak-est interior node. Regardless of the G2 implementation, each node still requires G1 and G3: TEE attests that 

some model ran correctly, but only G1 ensures it was the authorized model, and only G3 provides tamper-evident records. 

4.10 Enhanced G2: Zero-Knowledge Be-havioral Verification 

The basic G2 instantiation requires provider cooperation :the verifier must re-execute the agent’s declared model on recorded inputs and compare outputs. This creates two limitations: (1) the verifier must have API access to the same model version, and (2) the original prompts and outputs are disclosed to the verifier, which may contain sensitive information. 

Designated-Verifier SNARKs (DV-SNARKs) ad-dress both limitations by enabling the agent (or adelegated prover) to demonstrate output consistency 

in zero knowledge : the verifier learns only that 

CharMatch (O, O replay ) ≥ θ, without seeing O, Oreplay ,or the prompts. 

Key design insight. Unlike BAID [ 2], which SNARKs over the entire transformer forward pass ( ∼120 s per proof for a 7B model), our approach SNARKs only over the 

verification metric computation —a fundamentally simpler circuit: 9Definition 9 (CharMatch Verification Circuit) .

Cverify (O, O replay , θ ) = 

{

1 if |{ i:O[i]= Oreplay [i]}|  

> max( |O|,|Oreplay |)

≥ θ

0 otherwise 

For typical agent outputs ( |O| ≤ 4,096 characters), the circuit requires O(|O|) equality comparisons and a single division—on the order of 10 4 R1CS constraints (specifi-cally: 19,238 for 1K outputs, ∼73 ,000 for 4K outputs), compared to ∼10 10 for a transformer circuit. This reduces proof generation from minutes to sub-seconds. 

Designated-Verifier property. The proof is bound to a specific verifier’s public key, preventing proof transfer. Only the designated auditor can verify the proof, which prevents a compromised agent from shopping for a lenient verifier. The DV property also prevents the proof from being used as transferable evidence—a deliberate design choice that limits the proof’s scope to the specific audit context. 

Protocol. Enhanced G2 verification proceeds as: 1. The agent (or a trusted replay service) executes the model on the recorded input to produce Oreplay .2. The prover computes π =DV -SNARK .Prove( Cverify , (O, O replay ), θ, pk verifier ).3. The verifier checks DV -SNARK .Verify (π, θ, sk verifier ) ?

=1.

What DV-SNARK does and does not prove. The SNARK proves that the prover possesses two strings whose CharMatch exceeds θ; it does not prove that Oreplay was produced by the declared model (that trust is delegated to the replay service). The SNARK’s contribution is privacy ;for full computational integrity, TEE or BAID-style full-inference SNARKs remain necessary. 

Cost-privacy tradeoff. DV-SNARK proof generation costs ∼174 ms (1K outputs) to ∼750 ms (4K outputs); Groth16 verification is constant at ∼1.3 ms (§7). Proof generation is ∼1,740 × slower than basic CharMatch but is offline and asynchronous; it is ∼690 × faster than BAID’s full-inference zkVM ( ∼120 s). The governance contract (G2) is identical; the privacy properties differ. 

Security. Knowledge soundness ensures that a prover cannot produce a valid proof without possessing strings satisfying the CharMatch predicate. The DV property ensures simulation-privacy: no entity other than the desig-nated verifier can distinguish a real proof from a simulated one. 

# 5 Verifiable Interaction Ledger 

5.1 Motivation 

Capability binding and reproducibility verify individual agents. Real-world incidents involve chains of interactions. We need an immutable, tamper-evident record where no single party—including the ledger operator—can unde-tectably alter history. 

Why OpenTelemetry traces are insufficient. The industry standard for agentic observability is OpenTeleme-try (OTEL) [ 47 ], whose span trees record execution traces with span_id /parent_id linkage, timestamped 

input.value /output.value payloads, and span-kind an-notations ( CHAIN , LLM , TOOL ). Analysis of the Nemotron-AIQ Agentic Safety Dataset [ 46 ]—10,796 OTEL traces from NVIDIA’s AI-Q research assistant under 22 distinct attack templates—reveals three critical gaps: (1) No in-tegrity protection : span linkage is purely referential; any party with storage access can modify, delete, or reorder spans undetectably. (2) No identity binding : spans record function names but not cryptographically verified agent identities or capability certificates. (3) No privacy preser-vation : OTEL stores full plaintext input/output payloads, creating data exposure risk. Our interaction ledger ad-dresses all three gaps through hash-chain linking ( hprev ), bilateral digital signing ( sig i; Ed25519 in the basic in-stantiation), agent certificate binding ( ch send , ch recv ), and commitment-only storage ( ηin , η out ). 

5.2 Ledger Structure 

Definition 10 (Interaction Record) . Ri =(seq i, t i, a send , a recv , ch send , ch recv , η in , η out , π i, h prev , sig i)

where ηin = SHA -256 (input ), ηout = SHA -256 (output ),

πi = (seed , model _ver , skills _hash ), and hprev =SHA -256( Ri−1).

Definition 11 (Verifiable Interaction Ledger) . L =(R1, . . . , R n) satisfying: (1) sequential consistency, (2) hash chain integrity, and (3) signature validity at every record. 

5.3 Privacy Preservation 

The ledger stores only commitments (hashes), not content. During normal operation, only interaction metadata is revealed. During forensic investigation, parties produce original content verified against stored commitments. 

5.4 Forensic Reconstruction Protocol 

The protocol proceeds in five steps: (1) identify the rele-vant interaction chain, (2) verify ledger integrity (signa-tures + hash chain), (3) request content disclosure and verify against commitments, (4) verify agent certificates at interaction time, and (5) execute replay verification for agents with reproducibility commitments. 

5.5 Chain Auditability 

Analogous to the Chain Verifiability Theorem for G2 (§4.9), interaction auditability is a chain property : a single missing interaction record along an execution path breaks forensic reconstruction for all downstream nodes on that path. 

Definition 12 (Chain Auditability Depth) . For execution chain v0 → v1 → · · · → vn with v0 a non-agent trust anchor, define: 

CAD( vn) = min {j ≥ 1 : 

record for vj−1 → vj absent from L} 

10 with CAD (vn) = n if all records are present (fully auditable chain). 

Property 2 (Chain Auditability) . If CAD (vn) = k < n ,then for all i ≥ k:1. Provenance gap : the auditor cannot trace vi’s out-put back to the trust anchor v0, because the input vk

received from vk−1 is unrecorded. 2. G2 cascade : replay verification for vk is impossible— the sender-authenticated input ηin required by Prop-erty 10 is unavailable. By induction, downstream G2 verification inherits the same gap even if ρvi .level =

full .

This creates a symmetric pair of chain properties: G2’s Chain Verifiability (Theorem 2) governs behavioral verifica-tion depth , while G3’s Chain Auditability governs forensic reconstruction depth . Because G2 replay depends on G3’s sender-signed input (Property 10), the effective verifica-tion depth of any execution path is min ( CVD , CAD )—the minimum of the two chain depths. 

5.6 G3 as a Governance Contract 

Like G1 and G2, G3 defines what properties interaction records must satisfy, not how the ledger is implemented. The governance contract requires: (1) every inter-agent and agent-human interaction produces a record with bilat-eral signatures and content commitments; (2) records are linked in a tamper-evident chain; (3) sufficient metadata exists for forensic reconstruction. Our current instantiation uses a centralized append-only ledger operated by a trusted organizational entity (e.g., the deploying enterprise). This is the simplest design that satisfies G3: agents submit bilaterally-signed records to the operator, who maintains the hash chain and provides query access during audits. The operator is assumed honest for availability (it will not selectively omit records) and ordering (it will not reorder records), while integrity is enforced cryptographically regardless of operator behavior (bilateral signatures + hash chain prevent undetectable modification). Alternative instantiations satisfying the same G3 con-tract include: (a) multi-operator consensus , where f +1-of-

n operators must agree on each append, eliminating single-operator availability trust at the cost of consensus latency; (b) append-only transparency logs analogous to Certificate Transparency, where multiple independent monitors cross-check the ledger for consistency; (c) blockchain-anchored commitments , where periodic ledger root hashes are an-chored to a public blockchain for non-repudiable times-tamping. Each alternative trades latency or operational complexity for stronger trust assumptions. The G3 con-tract is invariant across all instantiations—what changes is the trust model of the storage layer, not the governance semantics of the records. 

# 6 Formal Security Properties 

We state seven security properties and two theorems under the adversary model of §2. The basic instantiation uses standard cryptographic assumptions: EUF-CMA security of Ed25519, collision resistance of SHA-256, and the DiFR token divergence property [ 1]. The enhanced instantiation additionally relies on q-SDH and DDH in Type-3 bilinear groups (BBS+ unforgeability and zero-knowledge, §3.5) and knowledge soundness of Groth16 (DV-SNARK, §4.10). All proofs are in Appendix A. 

Property 3 (Trust Containment) . For all edges (u, v ) ∈

E: κv ≤κ κu.

Property 4 (Capability Binding) . If Hv (t′)̸ = Hcert  

> v

,then ∀t ≥ t′ : Access( v, c, t ) = DENY .

Property 5 (Chain Integrity) . Only chains forming a valid path from a trusted root with valid signatures pass verification. 

Property 6 (Delegation Depth Enforcement) . Agent del-egation depth from any non-agent ancestor never exceeds 

max _depth .

Property 7 (Reproducibility Soundness) . Under software G2 (replay verification): if v executes M ′̸ = M or S′̸ =

S, replay verification detects with probability ≥ 1 − ϵ(λ).Under hardware G2 (TEE): detection is deterministic. 

Theorem 3 (Bounded Divergence Under Verifica-tion) . If M ′ passes replay verification (CharMatch 

≥ θ) on n independent prompts from D, then 

Pr x∼D [ CharMatch (M (x), M ′(x)) < θ ] ≤ ϵ where ϵ ≤

1 − α1/n , with α the significance level. 

Property 8 (Credential Isolation) . Accessible (C′) = ⋃ 

> v∈C′

Accessible( {v}).

Property 9 (Ledger Integrity) . No party can undetectably modify, delete, or reorder records. 

Theorem 4 (Chain Verifiability) . Let v0 → v1 → · · · → 

vn be an execution chain where v0 is a non-agent trust anchor, and let CVD (vn) = k < n (Definition 8). Then for all i > k , the output of vi cannot be verified as origi-nating from a legitimate computation chain rooted at v0,even if ρvi .level = full .

Property 10 (G2 Input Integrity via Bilateral Signing) .

Replay verification for a compromised agent vj uses sender-authenticated input, not self-reported input. Consequently, G2 soundness does not circularly depend on vj ’s own hon-esty. 

Rationale. A potential concern is circular dependency: G2 replay verification requires the recorded input to be authentic, but if the compromised agent vj controls its own input recording, it could fabricate inputs that make its unauthorized output appear legitimate. We show this is precluded by the bilateral signing structure of G3. 11 In any execution chain, agent vj ’s input is the out-put of its predecessor vj−1. The interaction record Ri

in the ledger contains the input commitment ηin =SHA -256 (input ) and is bilaterally signed by both vj−1

(sender) and vj (receiver). We consider three cases for 

vj−1:

Case 1: vj−1 is a non-agent node (human or organi-zation). By the adversary model (§2), non-agent nodes are uncompromised. vj−1 signs the interaction record containing ηin . Agent vj cannot modify ηin without inval-idating vj−1’s signature (EUF-CMA). Therefore the input committed to the ledger is the true input vj received. 

Case 2: vj−1 is an honest agent. The same argument applies: vj−1 signs its output and the corresponding ledger record. vj cannot forge vj−1’s signature on a different ηin .

Case 3: vj−1 is also compromised. Then vj−1’s output is itself unverifiable. However, the Chain Verifiability Theorem (Theorem 4) already establishes that all nodes downstream of the first unverifiable agent lose end-to-end verification guarantees. In this case, vj is downstream of the already-compromised vj−1, so the chain verifiability depth CVD ≤ j − 1 < j , and no claim of end-to-end verification extends to vj regardless. In Cases 1 and 2, the verifier reconstructs vj ’s input via the forensic reconstruction protocol (§5): request vj−1 to disclose the original content, verify it against the sender-signed ηin , then replay vj ’s declared model on this au-thenticated input. The dependency is therefore unidirec-tional —G2 relies on G3’s sender-side input commitment, which is established independently of vj —not circular. 

Chain Auditability. This unidirectional dependency implies that G3 also exhibits a chain property: if an in-teraction record along an execution path is absent from the ledger, G2 replay verification at that point becomes impossible (the authenticated input is unavailable), and by induction all downstream provenance tracing fails. The effective verification depth of any execution path is there-fore min ( CVD , CAD )—the minimum of Chain Verifiabil-ity Depth (Definition 8) and Chain Auditability Depth (Definition 12). This symmetric pair of chain properties— G2 governing behavioral verification depth, G3 governing forensic reconstruction depth—underscores the mutual reinforcement of the governance requirements. 

# 7 Implementation and Evaluation 

7.1 Prototype Architecture 

We implement the framework as two Rust crates: 

agent-trust-kit (open-source SDK) and a2auth (cre-dential governance application). Table 3 summarizes the implementation. 

7.2 Performance Evaluation 

We evaluate on Apple M2, 16 GB RAM, macOS (Crite-rion.rs, 10,000 samples, 3s warmup). Table 4 summarizes microbenchmarks for the four core governance primitives. Table 3: Implementation summary.                            

> Component Dependencies LoC
> Core SDK (cert, skills, trust tree, ring ,sha2 ,ed25519-dalek ,∼5,600 ledger, vault, registry, MCP) sled ,aes-gcm ,clap
> Enhanced G1: BBS+ disclosure zkryptium ∼270 Enhanced G2: DV-SNARK circuit ark-groth16 ,ark-r1cs-std ∼350 Real LLM repro. validation anthropic ,sklearn (Python) ∼870 Adversarial G2 validation transformers ,peft (Python) ∼2,680 MCP governance proxy demo cryptography ,cbor2 (Python) ∼520
> Total (Rust + Python) ∼11,090

Table 4: Core governance microbenchmarks (Experi-ments 1–4). 

Operation Key parameter Latency 

Exp 1: Certificate chain verification 

Depth-2 chain 2 Ed25519 sigs 66.1 μsDepth-5 chain (max practical) 5 Ed25519 sigs 163.6 μsCapability binding 32-byte compare <1 ns 

Exp 2: Skills manifest hash 

10 tools Sort+CBOR+SHA-256 5.10 μs100 tools Sort+CBOR+SHA-256 51.6 μs

Exp 3: Ledger operations 

Append record Ed25519 sign+sled 448 μsVerify single record Ed25519 verify 32.4 μsFull audit (100K records) Chain walk 3.46 s 

Exp 4: Reproducibility verification 

Token compare (512 tokens) Byte compare 416 ns Commit (512 tokens) SHA-256 6.55 μsBatch verify (100 ×512 tok) 41.8 μs

Verification scales at ∼33 μs/sig; token comparison at 

∼0.73 ns/token (100K interactions audited in ∼42 ms). 

Experiment 5: Real LLM Reproducibility Vali-dation. We validate the DiFR finding across 9 models from 7 providers (Claude Sonnet 4/Haiku 4.5, GPT-4.1/4.1 mini, Gemini 2.5 Pro, Grok 4, DeepSeek V3, Llama 4 Maverick, Kimi K2.5) via OpenRouter with temperature =0, 100 prompts across six task types, 10 repe-titions per model-prompt pair (5,400 API calls; 15,120 pair-wise comparisons). We compute four similarity metrics— CharMatch, Jaccard, TF-IDF cosine, char n-gram cosine— and use Cohen’s d and Youden’s J for separation analysis and threshold selection. 

Result 5b. Table 5 shows multi-provider separation (p ≈ 0 for all metrics). Table 5: Multi-provider separation: 9 models, 7 providers (15,120 comparisons). 

Metric Same Cross Sep. d

CharMatch 0.538 0.114 4.7× 1.36 Jaccard 0.710 0.321 2.2× 1.51 TF-IDF cosine 0.839 0.586 1.4× 1.08 Char n-gram cos 0.871 0.640 1.4× 1.20 

12 All metrics achieve Cohen’s d > 1.0; Jaccard ( d =1.51 ) and CharMatch ( d = 1 .36 ) provide the strongest separation. 

Result 5c. Table 6 ranks per-model determinism. Table 6: Per-model same-model reproducibility (Char-Match, temperature =0). 

Model Provider CharMatch Std 

Claude Haiku 4.5 Anthropic 0.987 0.088 Claude Sonnet 4 Anthropic 0.823 0.273 GPT-4.1 mini OpenAI 0.701 0.335 GPT-4.1 OpenAI 0.617 0.363 Llama 4 Maverick Meta 0.528 0.360 Grok 4 † xAI 0.402 0.343 Gemini 2.5 Pro † Google 0.392 0.397 DeepSeek V3 DeepSeek 0.225 0.271 Kimi K2.5 † Moonshot 0.169 0.233 

> †Reasoning/thinking model (internal chain-of-thought).

Determinism spans 5.8× (Haiku 4.5: 0.987 to Kimi K2.5: 

0.169 ); even the least deterministic model exceeds mean cross-provider similarity ( 0.114 ). Per-task separation ranges from 12 .2× (math) to 2.6× (JSON). 

Result 5e. Via Youden’s J (Table 7), Jaccard and Char-Match attain F1 > 0.87 across all 9 models, confirming lightweight textual similarity provides practical model identity verification without model internals. Table 7: Optimal classification thresholds (multi-provider, 15,120 comparisons). 

Metric θ∗ Youden’s J F1

Jaccard 0.408 0.592 0.876 CharMatch 0.146 0.572 0.873 Char n-gram cos 0.809 0.538 0.855 TF-IDF cosine 0.837 0.466 0.844 

Experiment 6: Adversarial Model Substitution Detection. We train three QLoRA backdoor variants (keyword B1, semantic B2, compositional B3) on three architectures (Qwen 2.5 7B, Llama 3.1 8B, Gemma 2 9B) and test G2 replay detection across four prompt strategies at budgets n ∈ { 10 , 25 , 50 , 100 , 200 } (357 configs). Table 8: G2 adversarial detection rate at temperature = 0 

(3 models × 4 strategies). 

Budget ( n) B1 B2 B3 Avg 

10 99.0% 99.2% 99.2% 99.1% 25 100% 100% 100% 100% 200 99.1% 98.9% 99.1% 99.1% 

Detection is near-universal (minimum 90% across all 357 configs). Mean CharMatch between base and backdoored outputs is 0.057, far below θ∗ = 0 .146 : modifying weights to implant an effective backdoor unavoidably shifts the clean-input distribution, making substitution detectable (§8). 

7.3 Overhead and Comparison 

Experiment 7: End-to-End MCP Overhead. 

Phase Latency 

MCP request parse 0.02 ms Certificate chain verification 0.097 ms Skills hash comparison <0.001 ms Proxy token validation 0.05 ms Ledger append 0.448 ms 

Total governance overhead ∼0.62 ms 

Typical MCP call (no governance) 50–500 ms 

Overhead as % of total 0.1–1.2% 

Experiment 8: Enhanced Instantiation Bench-marks. 

Table 9: Enhanced cryptographic backends: BBS+ (G1) and Groth16 DV-SNARK (G2). 

Operation Latency vs. Basic 

BBS+ selective disclosure (16-message cert) 

Full disclosure verification 12.27 ms 127 ×

Selective proof gen (6/16) 14.66 ms 151 ×

Selective proof verification 13.80 ms 142 ×

Groth16 DV-SNARK CharMatch circuit 

Prove (1,024 chars, 19K constraints) 173.86 ms —Prove (4,096 chars, ∼73K constraints) 750.33 ms —Verify (constant) 1.28 ms —

Experiment 9: Comparison with BAID.                      

> Metric BAID Ours (basic) Ours (enhanced)
> G1 verification —0.097 ms 13.80 ms G2 proof gen (1K) ∼120 s ∼0.1 ms †174 ms G2 proof verify ∼10 ms <0.01 ms †1.3 ms Circuit size ∼10 10 —19,238 Privacy Full ZK None Selective / ZK Infrastructure Blockchain None None
> †Direct CharMatch comparison (no SNARK).

BBS+ adds ∼142 × overhead but enables selective dis-closure; DV-SNARK verification is constant at ∼1.3 ms. Our DV-SNARK is ∼690 × faster than BAID for proof generation ( ∼520 ,000 × fewer constraints), by SNARKing only the verification metric rather than the full trans-former forward pass. All enhanced operations remain within typical agent interaction latency (50–500 ms). 

Experiment 10: MCP Governance Proxy Demo. 

A Python proxy (520 lines) enforcing G1–G3 detects all 5 live attack scenarios (tool injection, trojanization, forged certificate, rate abuse, ledger tampering) in ≤165 μs each, achieving 8,195 governed calls/sec with mean overhead of 120 μs/call. 13 Depth 3 Depth 2 Depth 0                                     

> Root CA + Human
> NA ·T0
> Coordinator
> AG ·T1_HIGH ·d=2 G2= full
> cert
> Research
> T2 ·d=0 {web_search}
> Analysis
> T2 ·d=0 {data_proc}
> Writer
> T2 ·d=0 {text_gen}
> Review
> T3_MON ·d=0 {review}
> Fact-Check
> T2 ·d=0 {verify}
> results insights draft feedback
> Veriable Interaction Ledger 21 records/run ·bilateral Ed25519 signing ·hash-chain linked · ∼ 250 B/record
> Per-pipeline governance
> 10.8 ms total (0.12% overhead) 6 cert verications 10 capability checks 21 ledger appends
> E2E-1 :+tool E2E-2 :model swap E2E-3 :phantom deleg.
> E2E-4 :tamper
> E2E-5 :cascade
> Scaling: 5 →20 agents
> Parallel specialist groups Per-agent cost: 1.81 →2.30 ms Sub-linear scaling ( R2>0.99 )

Figure 5: Multi-agent pipeline with governance overlay. Red labels indicate attack injection points (Table 13). 

7.4 Attack Scenario Evaluation 

We evaluate 12 attack scenarios at three levels of valida-tion (Table 10): (1) Structural governance attacks (S1– S9) are tested as automated Rust unit tests that verify the governance algorithms correctly reject each attack construction—these validate algorithm correctness , not resistance to real-world attackers. (2) Runtime behav-ioral attacks (S10–S11), informed by the Nemotron-AIQ dataset [ 46 ], are validated via post-hoc forensic tracing :the ledger provides sufficient evidence to identify the in-jection point after the fact, but the framework does not prevent the attack in real time. (3) S12 (output exfil-tration) is detectable via replay divergence. The 6 E2E attacks in §7.5 provide the strongest validation: real-time detection in a live pipeline with real LLM calls. 

7.5 End-to-End Multi-Agent Pipeline 

We deploy the full governance stack in a multi-agent pipeline with real Claude API calls, measuring overhead, scaling, attack detection, and baseline comparison (Fig-ure 5). 

Pipeline architecture (Figure 5). We implement an AI Research Assistant using LangGraph with the Rust 

agent-trust-kit SDK exposed via PyO3 FFI. A Coordi-nator (T1_HIGH) orchestrates four specialist agents— Research (T2), Analysis (T2), Writer (T2), and Re-view (T3_MONITORED)—in a depth-3 trust tree. Each pipeline run produces 7 governed tool calls, each gener-ating a bilaterally-signed ledger record with capability verification and reproducibility commitment. 

Experiment 11a: Governance overhead. 

Table 11: Per-pipeline governance overhead (5-agent con-fig, 7 ledger entries/run, mean of 90 runs with real Claude API calls). 

Operation Per-call Calls Total 

G1: Capability check 39 μs 7 0.27 ms G2: Repro. commitment 86 μs 7 0.60 ms G3: Ledger append 1,300 μs 7 9.10 ms 

Total governance 7 10.0 ms 

Pipeline latency (real Claude API) ∼59.8 s 

Overhead <0.02% 

Governance adds ∼10 ms to a ∼60 s real-LLM pipeline (<0.02%), dominated by G3 ledger appends (91% of gov-ernance cost). Across 90 clean runs (630 governed tool calls), zero false positives and 100% ledger integrity 

are observed (95% CI: FPR < 3.3%). 

Experiment 11b: Scaling behavior. 

Table 12: Governance scaling: 5 → 20 agents (mock tool latency to isolate governance cost). 

Config Agents Ledger Gov. Per-agent Storage entries (ms) (ms) (KB) 

Small 5 7 6.9 1.37 1.7 Medium 10 16 12.9 1.29 3.9 Large 20 33 30.0 1.50 8.1 

Governance scales linearly with ledger entries; per-agent cost remains approximately constant (1.29–1.50 ms across 

4× scaling). Storage is ∼250 bytes/entry (8.1 KB for 20 agents). 

Experiment 11c: End-to-end attack detection. 

Table 13: End-to-end attack detection (real Claude API calls, 7 scenarios covering G1/G2/G3). 

Attack Target Layer Detection 

E2E-1: Cap. escalation Research G1 Tool not in manifest E2E-2: Model substitution Analysis G1 Model binding mismatch E2E-3: Phantom delegation Writer G1 No valid cert chain E2E-4: Ledger tampering Ledger G3 Hash chain break E2E-5: Tool trojanization Research G1 Manifest hash mismatch E2E-6: Depth overflow Review G1 Trust decay violation E2E-7: Replay divergence Analysis G2 CharMatch 0.00 < θ 

All seven attacks are detected, covering all three gov-ernance layers. E2E-2 is caught by G1’s model binding check: the certificate declares claude-sonnet-4 but the agent uses claude-haiku-4-5 . E2E-7 is the only attack requiring G2 (replay verification): the analysis agent’s certificate and model binding are correct (G1 passes), but the agent secretly produces attacker-controlled output instead of executing the declared model. Post-pipeline replay re-executes the declared model on the stored input and detects divergence (CharMatch =0.00 vs. θ=0.85)— demonstrating that G2 catches attacks invisible to G1 and G3. 14 Table 10: Attack scenario evaluation. S1–S9: algorithm correctness validated via automated unit tests (9/9 pass). S10–S11: post-hoc forensic tracing validated against Nemotron-AIQ traces. S12: detectable via replay divergence. The “Framework” column distinguishes Prevented (blocked in real time), Detected (identified but not blocked), and 

Traced (forensic reconstruction after the fact). 

Scenario Attack Baseline Framework Detection Mechanism 

S1: Silent escalation Add tool at runtime Undetected Prevented Skills manifest hash mismatch S2: Tool trojanization Replace implementation Undetected Prevented Code hash change S3: Model substitution Forged cert, wrong model Undetected Detected Signature verification failure S4: Phantom delegation T2 issues T1 cert Undetected Prevented Constraint monotonicity S5: Evidence tampering Modify ledger record N/A Detected Hash chain + sig invalidation S6: Blame shifting Dispute in chain Unresolvable Resolved Ed25519 bilateral signing S7: Credential collusion T3+T3 → T1 access Undetected Prevented Independent tier evaluation S8: Chain forgery Fabricated chain — Prevented Sig verify: fake key ̸ = root S9: Depth overflow Delegate at depth 0 — Prevented Depth counter exhausted S10: Knowledge poisoning Inject via tool output Undetected † Traced Ledger ηin /η out 

S11: Cascading hijack Multi-stage persistence Undetected † Traced Hash-chain provenance audit S12: Output exfiltration Embed phishing link Undetected † Detected Replay divergence 

> †100% attack success in Nemotron-AIQ undefended traces (2,596 security trials).

Experiment 11d: Baseline comparison. We evalu-ate the same seven attacks against three baselines. Table 14: E2E attack detection: A2Auth vs. baselines ( ✓

= detected, ✗ = undetected).                                             

> Attack None OAuth OTEL A2Auth
> E2E-1: Cap. escalation ✗✗✗✓(G1) E2E-2: Model substitution ✗✗✗✓(G1) E2E-3: Phantom delegation ✗✗a✗✓(G1) E2E-4: Ledger tampering N/A N/A ✗b✓(G3) E2E-5: Tool trojanization ✗✗✗✓(G1) E2E-6: Depth overflow ✗✗✗✓(G1) E2E-7: Replay divergence ✗✗✗✓(G2)
> Total detected 0/7 0/7 0/7 7/7
> aOAuth authenticates the agent but has no delegation depth constraint. bOTEL traces can be silently modified (no hash chain or signatures).

OAuth 2.1 verifies who the agent is but not what tools it currently has or which model it runs . Only A2Auth (G1+G2+G3) detects all seven E2E attacks, at <0.02% overhead. 

Experiment 11e: Governance coverage compar-ison with BAID and Ghosh et al. Table 14 com-pares against infrastructure baselines; Table 15 compares against the two closest research systems—BAID [ 2] (zkVM-based verifiable inference) and Ghosh et al. [ 46 ] (opera-tional safety with Nemotron-AIQ)—at the governance requirement level across all 12 attack categories. This is a design-level analysis: we map each system’s published mechanisms to the attack taxonomy of §2. 

# 8 Limitations, Governance Trilemma, and Future Work 

8.1 Scope of Contribution 

Our contribution is a governance architecture , not new cryptographic primitives. The building blocks (digital signatures, hash chains, replay verification) are individu-ally well-known; the contribution lies in identifying the capability-context separation as a principled governance boundary, proving structural constraints (Chain Verifiabil-ity, Bounded Divergence) that arise from this architecture, and defining abstract governance contracts (G1–G3) that hold across fundamentally different cryptographic back-ends. 

Why the composition is non-obvious. A counter-factual test: given Ed25519, SHA-256, and hash chains, would a security engineer independently arrive at G1–G3? The evidence suggests not. The MCP ecosystem has grown to over 1,000 tool servers with OAuth 2.1 as its security mechanism, yet no deployment detects capability drift (G1 gap). OpenTelemetry is the industry standard for agent observability, yet the Nemotron-AIQ dataset [ 46 ]demonstrates that 10,796 OTEL traces provide no tam-per evidence (G3 gap). BAID [ 2 ] constructs a zkVM over the full transformer pass, yet cannot detect whether the agent’s tool set has changed (G1 gap). Each exist-ing approach addresses a fragment; none recognizes the capability-context separation as the organizing principle, and none arrives at the three-requirement conjunction that Table 1 shows is necessary and sufficient. The composi-tion and the boundary identification are the contributions, validated by two instantiations (basic and enhanced) sat-isfying the same nine security properties under standard assumptions (CR, EUF-CMA; q-SDH, DDH, knowledge soundness). 15 Table 15: Governance coverage: A2Auth vs. BAID and Ghosh et al. across 12 attack categories. = prevented/detected in real time; G# = partially addressed or post-hoc only; ✗ = not addressed. Analysis is based on each system’s published design; BAID and Ghosh et al. were not re-implemented. 

Attack Requires BAID Ghosh A2Auth Notes 

ATK-1: Capability escalation G1 ✗ G# BAID verifies computation, not enrollment. Ghosh has policy scoping but no crypto-graphic binding. ATK-2: Model substitution G2 ✗ BAID provides deterministic proof via zkVM; A2Auth pro-vides statistical detection via replay. ATK-3: Tool trojanization G1 ✗ ✗ Neither BAID nor Ghosh hashes tool implementations. ATK-4–7: Delegation attacks G1 ✗ ✗ No trust tree or delegation con-straints in either system. ATK-8: Evidence tampering G3 ✗ G# Ghosh uses OTEL (no hash chain); BAID has no ledger. ATK-9: Blame shifting G2+G3 G# G# BAID proves per-execution in-tegrity but lacks bilateral sign-ing for attribution. ATK-10–11: Injection/hijack G3 (trace) ✗ G# G# Ghosh traces via OTEL (no integrity); A2Auth traces via hash-chain ledger. Neither prevents in real time. ATK-12: Output exfiltration G2 ✗ G# BAID proves correct execution deterministically; A2Auth de-tects via replay divergence. 

Governance requirements G2 only Partial G3 G1+G2+G3 

G2 proof generation ∼120 s — ∼0.1 ms ∗ / 174 ms †

Infrastructure Blockchain None None     

> ∗Basic instantiation (direct CharMatch). †Enhanced instantiation (DV-SNARK). BAID provides computational integrity (the declared model provably executed the computation)—a strictly stronger G2 guarantee than A2Auth’s statistical behavioral verification . However, BAID addresses only G2: it cannot detect capability escalation (G1) or audit interaction chains (G3). Ghosh et al.’s operational framework provides guardrails and red-teaming methodology but lacks cryptographic enforcement for any governance requirement. The three systems are complementary, not competing: BAID’s zkVM could serve as an enhanced G2 backend within the A2Auth architecture; Ghosh’s guardrails address content safety orthogonal to governance.

8.2 The Agent Governance Trilemma 

A fundamental question underlies the design of any agent governance framework: why can’t we simply have agents that are maximally capable, maximally fast, and maximally secure? We observe that this is not merely a current engineering limitation, but a structural constraint rooted in computability theory. 

Observation 1 (Agent Governance Trilemma, informal) .

For agent systems operating under a fixed computational budget, three desiderata— capability , performance , and 

security —cannot be simultaneously maximized. Formally: 1. High Capability + High Security ⇒ Perfor-mance ≤ 1/2. If an agent’s tool set is Turing-complete (unbounded capability) and full behavioral verification is required (high security), then verifica-tion costs at least as much as the original execution, so at most half the computational budget produces useful work. 2. Bounded Capability + High Security ⇒ Perfor-mance → 1. If the tool set is non-Turing-complete (bounded capability), verification reduces to lookup in a pre-computed table of valid input-output pairs, with 

O(1) per-query overhead. 3. High Capability + High Performance ⇒ Secu-rity degrades. If the agent is Turing-complete and most of the budget goes to useful work, insufficient resources remain for verification, and the verifier can-not detect all semantic deviations. 

Proof sketch for (1). Behavioral verification (G2) re-quires determining whether the agent’s output y matches what its declared model M would produce on input x.For general computations, the only universal method is re-execution : compute M (x) and compare. No sub-linear shortcut exists for arbitrary M , because M ’s out-put depends on the full complexity of its parameters and computation—the function M may be incompress-ible (its Kolmogorov complexity approaches its execution cost). Therefore Wverify ≥ Wtask , giving performance 16 ratio P = Wtask /(Wtask + Wverify ) ≤ 1/2. For Byzantine-fault-tolerant verification with k independent verifiers, 

P ≤ 1/(k + 1) .

Proof sketch for (2). When each tool ti has a fi-nite input space Ii and output space Oi, the set of valid 

(x, t i(x)) pairs is bounded by ∑ 

> i

|I i|. A hash table of valid pairs can be pre-computed offline and queried in 

O(1) per verification. Since the pre-computation is amor-tized over all future queries, the marginal verification cost is constant, and P → 1 as the number of task executions grows. 

Proof sketch for (3). This follows from Rice’s the-orem: “the output of agent A is safe” is a non-trivial semantic property of A’s program, and no algorithm can decide all such properties for Turing-complete programs. When the verification budget Wverify < W task , the verifier cannot re-execute all computations. Sampling-based veri-fication (checking n out of N outputs) provides statistical guarantees bounded by our Bounded Divergence Theorem (ϵ ≤ ln (1 /α )/n ), but the adversary can always deviate on the N − n unchecked outputs. Static analysis of agent programs is undecidable in the general case. 

How TEE sidesteps the trilemma. Hardware TEE replaces computational verification with hardware attes-tation, shifting the tradeoff from the compute domain to the trust assumption domain (reliance on hardware vendor integrity and supply chain security). TEE does not break the trilemma but trades compute cost for trust assumptions, and satisfies only G2—a TEE-attested agent still requires G1 and G3. 

Analogy to established impossibility results. The trilemma is structurally analogous to the CAP theo-rem [ 48 ] and the blockchain trilemma; we conjecture that a formal proof reducing to standard computability results is possible (§8.8). 

8.3 Governance Levels: Operationalizing the Trilemma 

The trilemma motivates three governance levels (Level 3: compile-time safety with bounded tools; Level 2: sampled verification for enterprise deployments; Level 1: post-hoc traceability for low-risk use cases), each corresponding to a different position in the capability-performance-security space. Full specifications including recommended crypto backends are given in Appendix B. The key insight is that every deployment’s security posture is legible : the governance level is declared in the agent’s certificate and recorded in the ledger, making the tradeoff explicit to auditors and downstream agents. 

8.4 Capability Boundedness and Meta-Tools 

The trilemma’s capability dimension distinguishes two tool classes. Bounded capabilities (web_search ,

read_file ) have finite or structurally constrained input-output spaces; G1 fully characterizes the envelope and verification is efficient. Unbounded capabilities 

(code_execution , shell_access ) are Turing-complete: G1 correctly records that the agent has the capability, but the envelope is formally declared yet semantically un-bounded —knowing an agent can execute code does not predict what code it will execute. For unbounded tools, governance either restricts to bounded mode (sandboxed execution, Level 3) or accepts unbounded mode with runtime monitoring ( P ≤ 1/2 per the trilemma, as the monitor consumes at least as much compute as the governed agent). G1–G3 provides the infrastructure for both: G1 declares boundedness, G2 verifies behavioral fidelity within the envelope, and G3 records all interactions for post-hoc audit. 

8.5 Capability Binding Limitations 

Closed-source binding. For closed-source models and tools, the skills hash captures configuration metadata (name, version, API schema), not implementation code. A provider could change implementation without changing the public descriptor. Reproducibility verification provides a complementary detection mechanism: implementation changes that alter behavior will be detected via replay divergence. 

Re-signing frequency. Mitigated through wildcard tool categories ( web_search@ˆ2.0 ) and short-lived auto-renewable certificates. A typical deployment (10 tools, weekly updates) incurs ∼520 certificate operations per year at <100 μs each—operationally negligible. 

8.6 Graceful Degradation under Partial G2 

When G2 is unavailable (reproducibility commitment =

none ), the framework degrades to G1+G3 only. Table 16 summarizes the security impact. Table 16: Security guarantees under G1+G2+G3 vs. G1+G3 degradation.                     

> Attack class G1+G2+G3 G1+G3
> Silent capability escalation (ATK-1) Prevented Prevented Tool trojanization (ATK-3) Prevented Prevented Phantom delegation (ATK-4) Prevented Prevented Chain/depth violation (ATK-5,6) Prevented Prevented Evidence tampering (ATK-8) Detected Detected Blame shifting (ATK-9) Resolved Resolved Credential collusion (ATK-7) Prevented Prevented Model substitution (ATK-2) Detected ✗
> Output exfiltration (ATK-12) Detected ✗

G1+G3 alone protect against 9 of 12 attack types. The attacks requiring G2—model substitution (ATK-2), cas-cading injection via model compromise (ATK-10/11), and output exfiltration (ATK-12)—share a common structure: the attacker operates within a valid capability envelope by substituting the computational process itself. 

Chain-level degradation. A G2 =none agent at an interior position breaks behavioral verification for all 17 downstream nodes (Chain Verifiability Theorem, §4.9); the deployment principles therein provide prescriptive architectural guidance. 

Statistical vs. computational security. Token-level reproducibility provides statistical rather than computa-tional security, but the Bounded Divergence Theorem (§4.8) bounds this gap: an adversary passing n replay checks has produced a model (n, ϵ )-indistinguishable from the original, with ϵ ≤ ln(1 /α )/n .

Verification metric limitations. Current textual similarity metrics (CharMatch, Jaccard) have lower sepa-ration power for reasoning models with high paraphrase variation. The architecture is metric-agnostic: any similar-ity function satisfying the threshold separation property can be substituted, and semantic similarity (embedding cosine distance) is a natural extension. 

Provider cooperation. Basic G2 requires access to the same model version, mitigated by negotiated replay rights, deterministic inference providers [ 6 ], or the en-hanced G2 instantiation (DV-SNARK, §4.10) which re-duces cooperation to one-time proof generation. 

8.7 Trust Infrastructure Limitations 

Non-agent node compromise. We assume non-agent nodes (CAs, humans, organizations) are uncompromised. Standard PKI mitigations apply (CT logs, TPM 2.0 trust anchors, multi-party issuance, short certificate lifetimes); our framework inherits these risks and mitigations from the PKI foundation. 

Ledger operator trust. The current G3 instantiation assumes a centralized operator honest for availability and ordering; record integrity is enforced cryptographically (bi-lateral signatures, hash chains) regardless. Alternative in-stantiations (multi-operator consensus, transparency logs, blockchain anchoring) can relax the availability assump-tion at the cost of latency, preserving G3 semantics (§5). 

Application-layer data flow. Our framework gov-erns agent identity and capability , not the content of data flows. Complementary approaches (data-flow taint track-ing, differential privacy) address this orthogonal concern. 

8.8 Future Work 

Formalizing the trilemma. A rigorous formaliza-tion reducing to Rice’s theorem and simulation bounds— analogous to the Gilbert–Lynch proof of CAP (2002)— would establish the trilemma as a foundational constraint on agent governance. 

Hardware-attested identity. TPM 2.0 and TEE [ 53 ,54 ] integration for stronger G2 guarantees without provider cooperation, addressing the trilemma by sub-stituting compute-domain verification with trust-domain attestation. 

Stealthy model substitution. Our adversarial exper-iment (Experiment 6) shows QLoRA-based backdoors are trivially detected. More sophisticated attacks (distillation-based backdoors, gradient-masked training) may produce stealthier substitutions; characterizing the fundamental limits of replay-based detection is an open question. 

Semantic verification metrics. Embedding-based semantic similarity for reproducibility verification with formal threshold analysis, potentially extending G2’s ap-plicability to low-determinism reasoning models. 

IVC for G3. An enhanced G3 using Incrementally Ver-ifiable Computation (e.g., Nova folding) would enable O(1) 

audit verification regardless of chain length, deferred as current scales do not justify the ∼200 × append overhead. 

Cross-protocol governance. Extending capability binding beyond MCP/A2A to emerging agent protocols. 

Dynamic trust calibration. Trust scores evolving based on ledger history, enabling governance levels to adapt automatically based on observed behavior. 

# 9 Related Work 

We organize related work along the four-layer landscape. 

Identity Platforms. Keyfactor [20 ] and HID Global [ 21 ] propose X.509 for agents but without tool binding. SPIFFE/SPIRE [ 22 , 23 ] provides workload iden-tity. CyberArk [38] extends PAM to agents. 

Authorization Frameworks. OIDC-A [ 4] extends OpenID Connect with agent claims. South et al. [ 3] pro-pose Agent-ID Tokens (ICML 2025). Agentic JWT [ 11 ]defines delegation with temporal constraints. 

Runtime Gateways. Gravitee [ 41 ] and Lasso [ 42 ]provide MCP proxies with per-call enforcement— fundamentally stateless. 

Governance Platforms. Credo AI [ 43 ] maintains agent registries at the documentation layer. 

Verifiable Execution. BAID [ 2 ] is a high-assurance instantiation of the G2 governance requirement (§4) within our framework: it uses full-inference zkVM SNARKs to achieve computational integrity without TEE hardware, cryptographically binding agent execution to a code com-mitment CP , thereby satisfying G2 and partially G1 via code-level identity. However, BAID’s CP does not en-compass dynamically acquired tools—an agent’s program binary remains unchanged when new tools are discov-ered via MCP or plugin registries, leaving the capability envelope outside its security perimeter (§1.2). Our frame-work is complementary rather than competing: BAID provides no G3 guarantee (no tamper-evident cross-agent audit trail) and incomplete G1 coverage for dynamic ca-pabilities, whereas our framework delivers the complete G1 ∧G2 ∧G3 governance architecture with BAID serving as one pluggable G2 backend for deployments requiring max-imum cryptographic assurance. For deployments priori-tizing practicality, our DV-SNARK path (§4.10) achieves privacy-preserving behavioral verification at ∼690 × lower cost ( ∼174 ms vs. ∼120 s) by SNARKing only the ver-ification metric (∼10 4 constraints) rather than the full model forward pass ( ∼10 10 constraints); both paths sat-isfy the same G2 governance contract with different cost-assurance tradeoffs. DiFR [ 1] demonstrates inference near-determinism. EigenAI [ 6] achieves 100% deterministic 18 inference. Attestable Audits [ 7] uses TEEs [ 53 ] for verifi-able AI benchmarks. 

Classical Trust Management. PolicyMaker [ 13 ], KeyNote [14], SPKI/SDSI [15], F-PKI [17], ARPKI [18]. 

Agent Protocols. A2A [ 9] provides agent commu-nication. MCP [ 8 ] enables agent-tool interaction with OAuth 2.1. Two recent works address MCP-specific se-curity gaps that validate our G1 requirement. ETDI [ 59 ]extends MCP with cryptographic signing of tool defini-tions and immutable versioning, directly mitigating tool squatting and rug-pull attacks—an MCP-specific instanti-ation of capability integrity. MCPSec [ 60 ] identifies the 

absence of capability attestation as a critical protocol vul-nerability, a finding that independently corroborates our capability-identity gap analysis (§1.2). Both works are protocol-specific engineering solutions: neither articulates the capability-context separation as a general principle, addresses behavioral verifiability (G2), nor provides inter-action auditability (G3). Our framework subsumes their observations as special cases of G1 while providing the complete G1 ∧G2 ∧G3 governance architecture. 

Agent Governance Frameworks. Cheng et al. [ 44 ]propose a three-pillar model (transparency, accountability, trustworthiness) as a conceptual governance framework. Allegrini et al. [ 45 ] formalize 31 task-lifecycle properties in CTL/LTL but address operational correctness rather than cryptographic governance. Ghosh et al. [ 46 ] pro-pose an operational safety framework with agent red-teaming probes (ARP), policy-based tool scoping, and OpenTelemetry-based audit trails, validated through a 10,796-trace dataset (Nemotron-AIQ) covering 22 secu-rity attack templates and 13 content-safety categories against NVIDIA’s AI-Q research assistant. Their empiri-cal results demonstrate that without guardrails, all 2,596 security attacks succeed (100%), and 20% of 2,800 safety attacks propagate to the final output—providing com-pelling evidence for the inadequacy of relying solely on model alignment. However, their OTEL-based audit trails lack cryptographic integrity: span linkage is purely refer-ential (no hash chaining), spans carry no agent identity binding (no certificates), and full plaintext I/O is stored (no privacy preservation). Our framework addresses these gaps with a formally verified, hash-chain-linked, bilaterally signed interaction ledger (Section 5). Furthermore, their “signed schemas” and “per-call capability tokens” remain design principles without cryptographic specification or formal proofs. Raza et al. [ 29 ] adapt TRiSM for agentic multi-agent systems. 

Instruction-Data Separation. A related line of work addresses the model’s inability to distinguish instructions from data within the transformer. The Instruction Hi-erarchy [ 61 ] trains models to prioritize system prompts over user inputs and tool outputs, establishing trust levels per input type. However, this operates at the model level via fine-tuning—it does not address the orchestration-layer problem that our capability-context separation tar-gets: tool definitions and runtime context have different governance lifecycles (infrequent re-authorization vs. per-interaction auditing) that no amount of model training can enforce. Our separation is complementary: even a perfectly instruction-following model requires external cryptographic infrastructure to detect when its capability envelope has changed (G1), verify its computational pro-cess (G2), and produce tamper-evident interaction records (G3). 

Regulatory Landscape. The EU AI Act (Regulation 2024/1689) requires traceability but lacks agent-specific implementing acts [ 34 ]. NIST CAISI [ 27 ] is developing agent standards. CSA [ 25 , 26 ] proposes agentic trust frameworks. 

# 10 Conclusion 

We identified silent capability escalation as a new vulnera-bility class in AI agent ecosystems and traced its root cause to a missing architectural distinction: the capability-context separation , which recognizes that tool defini-tions and runtime context have fundamentally different security semantics at the orchestration layer. From this principle, we derived three Agent Governance Require-ments (G1–G3) that define what an agent ecosystem must enforce, independent of how —a governance architecture, not new cryptographic primitives. Two structural results have prescriptive architectural consequences. The Chain Verifiability Theorem estab-lishes that behavioral verification is a chain property: one unverifiable interior agent breaks end-to-end verification for all downstream nodes, constraining how multi-agent systems must be architected. The Bounded Divergence Theorem transforms replay-based verification into a prob-abilistic safety certificate, establishing software G2 as a deployable approximation of trusted execution. A multi-provider reproducibility study (9 models, 7 providers) reveals 5.8× variance in inference determinism, directly connecting model characteristics to governance architec-ture and elevating reproducibility to a first-class model performance metric. We validated the framework with two crypto-agnostic instantiations—basic (Ed25519, SHA-256, hash chains; 97 μs verify) and enhanced (BBS+ selective disclosure, DV-SNARK; 13.8 ms verify)—both satisfying the same nine security properties. End-to-end evaluation over 5– 20 agent pipelines with real LLM calls confirms <0.02% governance overhead and real-time detection of 7 end-to-end attack scenarios (covering G1, G2, and G3) with zero false positives, while three baselines (no governance, OAuth 2.1, OpenTelemetry) detect none. An additional 9 structural attacks are validated via automated unit tests, and 3 runtime behavioral attacks are validated via post-hoc forensic tracing. The Agent Governance Trilemma (§8.2) reveals why no single configuration suffices: agents with unbounded capa-bilities (code execution, tool composition) require verifica-tion at least as expensive as the original execution, forcing 19 an explicit tradeoff between capability, performance, and security. G1–G3 provides the infrastructure for the full governance spectrum—from compile-time safety (bounded tools, full verification) to post-hoc traceability (unbounded tools, audit-only)—making each deployment’s security pos-ture explicit and auditable. As the EU AI Act’s high-risk provisions take effect and NIST develops agent-specific standards, the need for cryptographic infrastructure enforcing G1–G3 will only grow. By making reproducibility a prerequisite for be-havioral verifiability, our framework creates a concrete incentive for model providers to self-declare inference de-terminism characteristics—elevating reproducibility from an implementation detail to a first-class, security-critical model specification. We release the core mechanisms as an open-source SDK ( agent-trust-kit ) to enable ecosystem adoption. 

# References 

[1] A. Karvonen et al., “DiFR: Inference Verification Despite Nondeterminism,” arXiv:2511.20621 , 2025. 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.20621 

[2] Z. Lin, S. Zhang, G. Liao, D. Tao, T. Wang, “Binding Agent ID: Unleashing the Power of AI Agents with Accountability and Credibility,” arXiv:2512.17538 ,2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.17538 

[3] T. South et al., “Authenticated Delegation and Authorized AI Agents,” ICML 2025 (Position), 

arXiv:2501.09674 . https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.0 9674 

[4] S. N., “OpenID Connect for Agents (OIDC-A) 1.0: A Standard Extension for LLM-Based Agent Identity and Authorization,” arXiv:2509.25974 , 2025. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2509.25974 

[5] T. South et al., “Identity Management for Agentic AI,” OpenID Foundation, arXiv:2510.25819 , 2025. 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.25819 

[6] D. R. Alves, “EigenAI: Deterministic Inference, Ver-ifiable Results,” arXiv:2602.00182 , 2026. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2602.00182 

[7] C. Schnabl et al., “Attestable Audits: Verifiable AI Safety Benchmarks Using Trusted Execution Envi-ronments,” arXiv:2506.23706 , 2025. https://arxiv. org/abs/2506.23706 

[8] Anthropic, “Model Context Protocol (MCP) Speci-fication,” 2024. https://modelcontextprotocol.i o/specification 

[9] Google / Linux Foundation, “Agent2Agent (A2A) Protocol Specification v0.3,” 2025. https://github .com/google/A2A 

[10] “Improving Google A2A Protocol: Protecting Sensi-tive Data and Mitigating Unintended Harms in Multi-Agent Systems,” arXiv:2505.12490 , 2025. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2505.12490 

[11] “Agentic JWT: A Secure Delegation Protocol for Autonomous AI Agents,” arXiv:2509.13597 , 2025. 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.13597 

[12] C. Schroeder de Witt et al., “Open Challenges in Multi-Agent Security: Towards Secure Systems of Interacting AI Agents,” arXiv:2505.02077 , 2025. ht tps://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02077 

[13] M. Blaze, J. Feigenbaum, J. Lacy, “Decentralized Trust Management,” Proc. IEEE S&P , 1996. https: //dl.acm.org/doi/10.1109/SECPRI.1996.502679 

[14] M. Blaze, J. Feigenbaum, A. Keromytis, “The KeyNote Trust-Management System Version 2,” RFC 2704, 1999. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rf c/rfc2704 

[15] C. Ellison et al., “SPKI Certificate Theory,” RFC 2693, 1999. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rf c/rfc2693 

[16] D. Cooper et al., “Internet X.509 PKI Certificate and CRL Profile,” RFC 5280, 2008. https://www.rfc-e ditor.org/rfc/rfc5280 

[17] L. Chuat et al., “F-PKI: Enabling Innovation and Trust Flexibility in the HTTPS Public-Key Infras-tructure,” Proc. NDSS , 2022. https://www.ndss-s ymposium.org/ndss-paper/auto-draft-249/ 

[18] D. Basin et al., “ARPKI: Attack Resilient Public-Key Infrastructure,” Proc. CCS , 2014. https://dl.acm .org/doi/10.1145/2660267.2660298 

[19] S. Wrótniak, H. Leibowitz, E. Syta, A. Herzberg, “Provable Security for PKI Schemes,” Proc. CCS ,2024. https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/807 

[20] Keyfactor, “3 Things to Know About Keyfactor’s PKI-Based Identity for Agentic AI,” 2025. https: //www.keyfactor.com/blog/3-things-to-know-a bout-keyfactors-pki-based-identity-for-age ntic-ai/ 

[21] HID Global, “Trust Standards Evolve: AI Agents, the Next Chapter for PKI,” 2025. https://blog.h idglobal.com/trust-standards-evolve-ai-age nts-next-chapter-pki 

[22] HashiCorp, “SPIFFE: Securing the Identity of Agen-tic AI and Non-Human Actors,” 2025. https://www. hashicorp.com/en/blog/spiffe-securing-the-i dentity-of-agentic-ai-and-non-human-actors 

[23] Solo.io, “Agent Identity and Access Management— Can SPIFFE Work?” 2026. https://www.solo.io/ blog/agent-identity-management-spiffe 

20 [24] OASIS Security, “Agentic Access Management Frame-work,” 2025. https://www.oasis.security/blog/ agentic-access-management-framework 

[25] CSA, “AI Security: When Your Agent Crosses Multi-ple Independent Systems, Who Vouches for It?” 2026. 

https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/blog/202 6/03/11/ai-security-when-your-agent-cross es-multiple-independent-systems-who-vouch es-for-it 

[26] CSA, “The Agentic Trust Framework: Zero Trust Governance for AI Agents,” 2026. https://clouds ecurityalliance.org/blog/2026/02/02/the-age ntic-trust-framework-zero-trust-governanc e-for-ai-agents 

[27] NIST, “AI Agent Standards Initiative (CAISI),” 2026. 

https://www.nist.gov/caisi/ai-agent-standar ds-initiative 

[28] Ping Identity, “Identity for AI,” 2026. https://de veloper.pingidentity.com/identity-for-ai/in dex.html 

[29] S. Raza, R. Sapkota, M. Karkee, C. Emmanouilidis, “TRiSM for Agentic AI: A Review of Trust, Risk, and Security Management in LLM-based Agentic Multi-Agent Systems,” AI Open , vol. 7, pp. 71–95, 2026. 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/arti cle/pii/S2666651026000069 

[30] “Trusted AI Agents in the Cloud,” arXiv:2512.05951 ,2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.05951 

[31] Y. Ding, “Decentralized Multi-Agent System with Trust-Aware Communication,” arXiv:2512.02410 ,2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02410 

[32] Red Hat, “How to Enhance Agent2Agent (A2A) Se-curity,” 2025. https://developers.redhat.com/ articles/2025/08/19/how-enhance-agent2agent -security 

[33] MCP Ecosystem Report, “Over 1,000 MCP tool servers,” 2026. https://www.pulsemcp.com/ 

[34] L. Jones, “Agentic Tool Sovereignty,” European Law Blog , 2025. https://www.europeanlawblog.eu/pub /dq249o3c/release/1 

[35] A. Oueslati, R. Staes-Polet, The Future Society, “Ahead of the Curve: Governing AI Agents Under the EU AI Act,” 2025. https://thefuturesociety.o rg/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/Report-Ahead -of-the-Curve-Governing-AI-Agents-Under-the -EU-AI-Act-4-June-2025.pdf 

[36] Token Security, “The Shift From Credentials to Capabilities in AI Access Control Systems,” 2025. 

https://www.token.security/blog/the-shift-f rom-credentials-to-capabilities-in-ai-acc ess-control-systems 

[37] Obsidian Security, “The 2025 AI Agent Security Land-scape: Players, Trends, and Risks,” 2025. https: //www.obsidiansecurity.com/blog/ai-agent-m arket-landscape 

[38] CyberArk, “Securing Identities for the Agentic AI Landscape,” 2026. https://www.cyberark.com/r esources/blog/securing-identities-for-the -agentic-ai-landscape 

[39] Aembit, “Workload-to-Workload Identity for Non-Human Entities,” 2025. https://aembit.io/ 

[40] Cerbos, “MCP Authorization: Securing Model Con-text Protocol Servers With Fine-Grained Access Con-trol,” 2026. https://www.cerbos.dev/blog/mcp-a uthorization 

[41] Gravitee, “AI Agent Management,” 2026. https: //www.gravitee.io/ai-agent-management 

[42] Lasso Security, “Secure Your MCP Connections,” 2026. https://www.lasso.security/use-cases /mcp-security 

[43] Credo AI, “Agents Registry,” 2026. https://www.cr edo.ai/ai-agent-registry 

[44] E. C. Cheng, J. Cheng, A. Siu, “Toward Safe and Responsible AI Agents: A Three-Pillar Model for Transparency, Accountability, and Trustworthiness,” 

arXiv:2601.06223 , 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2601.06223 

[45] E. Allegrini, A. Shreekumar, Z. B. Celik, “Formalizing the Safety, Security, and Functional Properties of Agentic AI Systems,” arXiv:2510.14133 , 2025. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2510.14133 

[46] S. Ghosh et al., “A Safety and Security Framework for Real-World Agentic Systems,” arXiv:2511.21990 ,2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.21990 

[47] OpenTelemetry Authors, “OpenTelemetry Specifica-tion v1.40,” CNCF, 2025. https://opentelemetry. io/docs/specs/otel/ 

[48] S. Gilbert, N. Lynch, “Brewer’s Conjecture and the Feasibility of Consistent, Available, Partition-Tolerant Web Services,” ACM SIGACT News , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 51–59, 2002. https://dl.acm.org/doi/1 0.1145/564585.564601 

[49] Y. Bai et al., “Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback,” arXiv:2212.08073 , 2022. https://ar xiv.org/abs/2212.08073 

21 [50] NVIDIA, “NeMo Guardrails: A Toolkit for Control-lable and Safe LLM Applications with Programmable Rails,” arXiv:2310.10501 , 2023. https://arxiv.or g/abs/2310.10501 

[51] D. Tessaro, C. Zhu, “Revisiting BBS Signatures,” 

Proc. EUROCRYPT , 2023. https://eprint.iacr. org/2023/275 

[52] A. Lysyanskaya, “BBS+ Signatures Revisited: Se-curity Proofs, Threshold Issuance and Applications,” 

Proc. CRYPTO , 2024. [53] V. Costan, S. Devadas, “Intel SGX Explained,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch. , 2016/086, 2016. https://ep rint.iacr.org/2016/086 

[54] S. Pinto, N. Santos, “Demystifying Arm TrustZone: A Comprehensive Survey,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1–36, 2019. https://dl.acm.org/doi/1 0.1145/3291047 

[55] NVIDIA, “NVIDIA H100 Tensor Core GPU Archi-tecture: Confidential Computing,” Whitepaper, 2022. 

https://resources.nvidia.com/en-us-tensor-c ore 

[56] B. Laurie, A. Langley, E. Kasper, “Certificate Trans-parency,” RFC 6962, 2013. https://www.rfc-edi tor.org/rfc/rfc6962 

[57] J. H. Saltzer, D. P. Reed, D. D. Clark, “End-to-End Arguments in System Design,” ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. , vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 277–288, 1984. https://dl .acm.org/doi/10.1145/357401.357402 

[58] N. Hardy, “The Confused Deputy: (or why capa-bilities might have been invented),” ACM SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 36–38, 1988. 

https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/54289.871709 

[59] A. Bansod et al., “ETDI: Enhanced Tool Definition Interface—Mitigating Tool Squatting and Rug Pull Attacks in the Model Context Protocol Ecosystem,” 

arXiv:2506.01333 , 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2506.01333 

[60] A. Maloyan, D. Namiot, “Breaking the Protocol: A Critical Security Analysis of MCP Implementations,” 

arXiv:2601.17549 , 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2601.17549 

[61] E. Wallace et al., “The Instruction Hierarchy: Train-ing LLMs to Prioritize Privileged Instructions,” 

arXiv:2404.13208 , 2024. https://arxiv.org/ab s/2404.13208 

# A Proofs of Security Properties 

This appendix contains the full proofs for all theorems stated in §6. 

Proof of Property 3 (Trust Containment). Suppose A is-sues cert w with κw̸ ≤κ κv . The verifier checks κw ≤κ κv

using constraints in cert v , which is signed by v’s parent. 

A cannot modify cert v without the parent’s key. Recurs-ing upward, the chain terminates at an uncompromised non-agent ancestor (EUF-CMA). 

Proof of Property 4 (Capability Binding). By collision re-sistance: Pr [Hv (t′) = Hcert  

> v

] ≤ negl (λ) when Sv (t′)̸ = σv .Forging a new certificate requires the parent’s key (same argument as Property 3). 

Proof of Property 5 (Chain Integrity). Fabricating any link requires the corresponding private key. By EUF-CMA, A cannot produce valid signatures without the key. 

Proof of Property 6 (Delegation Depth Enforcement). 

Trust Containment requires κv .max _depth <κpar (v).max _depth (strict). Starting from depth d,the chain has at most d agent levels before reaching 0. 

Proof of Property 7 (Reproducibility Soundness). Hardware G2 : TEE attestation directly proves that the declared model was executed; substitution is detected with certainty. Software G2 : By DiFR [ 1], for different models the empirical match rate is δ ≈ 0.06 (character-level), validated in our Experiment 5 across 9 models and 7 providers. Our empirical data shows that the fraction of cross-model output pairs exceeding any reasonable threshold θ (e.g., θ = 0 .15 ) is at most q ≈ 0.02 (i.e., 

Pr [ CharMatch (M (x), M ′(x)) ≥ θ | M ′̸ = M ] ≤ q). Each verification prompt is therefore an independent Bernoulli trial with pass probability at most q. The probability that a substituted model passes all n verification prompts is at most qn, which is negligible for realistic n (e.g., 

q10 ≤ 10 −17 ). 

Proof of Theorem 3 (Bounded Divergence Under Verification). 

Let p = Pr x∼D [ CharMatch (M (x), M ′(x)) < θ]

be the true failure rate. Each verification trial 

Zi = 1[ CharMatch (M (xi), M ′(xi)) ≥ θ] is an indepen-dent Bernoulli (1 − p) random variable. Observing all 

n trials pass ( ∑ Zi = n), we seek an upper confidence bound on p.The probability of observing n successes when the true failure rate is p is (1 − p)n. The exact one-sided Clopper-Pearson upper bound at confidence level 1 − α is the value 

p∗ satisfying (1 − p∗)n = α, giving p∗ = 1 − α1/n .For small p∗, using the approximation ln (1 − p) ≈ − p:from (1 − p)n = α we get n ln (1 − p) = ln α, hence p ≈

ln(1 /α )/n .This is a distribution-free result: the bound depends only on the number of verification trials n and the desired confidence level α, not on the threshold θ or any distri-butional assumptions on the CharMatch statistic. The role of θ is solely to define what constitutes a “pass”—a 22 higher θ increases sensitivity but may also increase false positives for the legitimate model. 

Proof of Property 8 (Credential Isolation). Access de-pends solely on the requesting agent’s certificate. No protocol mechanism combines permissions. Proxy tokens are bound to specific agent IDs. 

Proof of Property 9 (Ledger Integrity). (a) Modification invalidates hprev of successor, cascading through chain; re-signing requires all subsequent senders’ keys. (b) Deletion breaks hash chain. (c) Reordering breaks both sequence numbers and hash links. 

Proof of Theorem 4 (Chain Verifiability). We proceed by induction on chain position. 

Base case (i = k + 1 ): Agent vk has ρ. level = none .Under the adversary model (§2), A may have replaced 

vk’s model Mk with M ′

> k

. Since no replay verification applies to vk, the verifier cannot distinguish vk’s actual output o′ 

> k

= M ′

> k

(input k) from the legitimate output o∗ 

> k

=

Mk(input k). Both are validly signed by vk (G3 ✓) and 

vk’s certificate is valid (G1 ✓). Agent vk+1 receives o′ 

> k

as input. Even with ρvk+1 .level = full , replay verification confirms vk+1 (o′

> k

) = ok+1 —i.e., vk+1 faithfully processed 

o′

> k

. But since o′ 

> k

may differ from o∗

> k

, the computation is correct on potentially corrupted input. The verifier cannot detect this because verifying vk+1 ’s replay requires vk’s output as the reference input, which is itself unverifiable. 

Inductive step : Assume the output of vi−1 (i − 1 > k )cannot be verified as legitimate. Agent vi receives this unverifiable output as input. By the same argument as the base case, vi’s replay verification confirms computational fidelity on unverifiable input. 

Proof of Property 10 (G2 Input Integrity via Bilateral Signing). 

Let vj be a compromised agent and let Ri =(. . . , a send , a recv , . . . , η in , . . . , sig i) be the ledger record for the interaction delivering input to vj , where asend = vj−1

and arecv = vj .The record Ri is bilaterally signed: sig i includes sig-natures from both vj−1 and vj . The input commitment 

ηin = SHA -256( input ) is covered by vj−1’s signature. 

Claim : vj cannot cause the verifier to use a fabricated input input ′̸ = input for replay verification. Suppose vj attempts to present input ′ during forensic reconstruction. The verifier computes SHA -256 (input ′)

and compares against ηin in the ledger record. By colli-sion resistance of SHA-256, SHA -256 (input ′) = ηin with negligible probability when input ′̸ = input . Moreover, modifying ηin in the record Ri invalidates vj−1’s signa-ture (EUF-CMA of Ed25519), and is further detectable via hash-chain integrity ( hprev of Ri+1 would not match). When vj−1 is honest (Cases 1 and 2 in Property 10), the verifier independently requests vj−1 to disclose input and verifies it against ηin , bypassing vj entirely. When vj−1 is also compromised (Case 3), both parties may collude to present a consistent fabrication. How-ever, Chain Verifiability (Theorem 4) already establishes 

CVD ≤ j − 1 < j : the chain’s verifiable region does not extend to vj , so G2 replay of vj is not claimed to provide end-to-end guarantees in this configuration. 

# B Governance Levels 

The Agent Governance Trilemma (Observation 1) implies that no single governance configuration is optimal for all deployments. G1–G3 provide the infrastructure for three governance levels, each corresponding to a different position in the capability-performance-security space: 

Level 3: Compile-Time Safety (high security + high performance, bounded capability). For safety-critical deployments—financial transactions, medical decisions, le-gal document generation—agents are restricted to bounded tools only : no code execution, no tool composition. G1 binds the complete capability envelope; G2 with full replay verification ( n ≥ 200 , ϵ < 2.3% at 99% confidence) en-sures behavioral fidelity; G3 provides complete audit trails. 

Recommended crypto backend : Enhanced G1 (BBS+ with predicate proofs, §3.5) + Enhanced G2 (DV-SNARK, §4.10). 

Level 2: Sampled Verification (balanced tradeoff). For enterprise deployments—data processing, customer service, code generation—agents may use selected un-bounded tools, but G2 operates in statistical mode with periodic sampling. A verification budget of n = 50 per audit cycle bounds adversarial divergence to ϵ < 8.9% 

(99% confidence). G1 declares the capability envelope; G3 ensures traceability. Recommended crypto backend :Enhanced G1 (BBS+ selective disclosure) + Basic G2 (direct CharMatch). 

Level 3: Post-Hoc Traceability (high capability + high performance, reduced security). For low-risk deployments—writing assistance, creative design, infor-mation retrieval—agents operate with full capability and minimal runtime overhead. G2 is set to none ; G1 pro-vides basic capability declaration; G3 provides lightweight interaction traces. Security relies on post-hoc forensic reconstruction. Recommended crypto backend : Basic G1 (Ed25519). The governance level is declared in the agent’s certificate and recorded in the ledger, making each deployment’s security posture explicit to auditors, compliance systems, and downstream agents. 23