Title: $\tau$-Knowledge: Evaluating Conversational Agents over Unstructured Knowledge

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.04370v1

Published Time: Thu, 05 Mar 2026 02:28:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# τ -Knowledge: Evaluating Conversational Agents over Unstructured Knowledge 

Quan Shi * 1 Alexandra Zytek * 1 Pedram Razavi 1 Karthik Narasimhan 2 Victor Barres 1

§ Code 

# Abstract 

Conversational agents are increasingly deployed in knowledge-intensive settings, where correct behavior depends on retrieving and applying domain-specific knowledge from large, propri-etary, and unstructured corpora during live inter-actions with users. Yet most existing benchmarks evaluate retrieval or tool use independently of each other, creating a gap in realistic, fully agentic evaluation over unstructured data in long-horizon interactions. We introduce τ -Knowledge , an ex-tension of τ -Bench for evaluating agents in envi-ronments where success depends on coordinating external, natural-language knowledge with tool outputs to produce verifiable, policy-compliant state changes. Our new domain, τ -Banking , mod-els realistic fintech customer support workflows in which agents must navigate roughly 700 in-terconnected knowledge documents while exe-cuting tool-mediated account updates. Across embedding-based retrieval and terminal-based search, even frontier models with high reason-ing budgets achieve only ∼25.5% pass ˆ1, with reliability degrading sharply over repeated trials. Agents struggle to retrieve the correct documents from densely interlinked knowledge bases and to reason accurately over complex internal policies. Overall, τ -Knowledge provides a realistic testbed for developing agents that integrate unstructured knowledge in human-facing deployments. 

# 1. Introduction 

Today, language agents are frequently deployed in settings that require interactions with private, custom, and unstruc-tured knowledge bases (KBs). In such deployments, agents must ground their actions in these knowledge sources, re-spond to human users, and discover internal capabilities and the rules and constraints that govern their actions (Wang    

> *Equal contribution 1Sierra 2Princeton University. Correspon-dence to: Quan Shi <ben.s@sierra.ai >.Preprint. Work in progress.

& Yuan, 2025; Xu & Peng, 2025). Despite the prevalence of this setting in the real world, existing evaluation bench-marks for language agents rarely capture this complexity. Most prior work evaluates either retrieval in isolation, typi-cally for question answering or web search (Thakur et al., 2021; Muennighoff et al., 2023; Su et al., 2025), or tool use in isolation (Yao et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025a; Huang et al., 2024), without requiring agents to reason over pri-vate knowledge bases containing out-of-distribution product terms, detailed policies, and discoverable capabilities. Ad-ditionally, retrieval in these settings typically occurs during live interactions with users, which introduces significant stochasticity in the form of underspecified goals, ambiguous queries, and evolving user intent. To address this gap, we introduce τ -Knowledge, an exten-sion of τ -Bench (Yao et al., 2025) that evaluates agents in knowledge-grounded environments through a new domain, τ -Banking. τ -Banking is a new fintech-based domain in which task success depends on finding and ap-plying information from a natural-language knowledge base of roughly 700 documents covering product details, proce-dural policies, and tool documentation. To construct this corpus at scale while preserving internal consistency, we use a structured-to-unstructured generation pipeline that expands a latent structured specification of products, poli-cies, and tools into natural-language documents. The tasks mirror realistic customer support flows, such as opening and closing accounts, redeeming referral promotions, and handling direct-deposit inquiries, while requiring agents to coordinate knowledge-base evidence with tool outputs over long-horizon conversations. Importantly, as in real-world deployments, capabilities are not fully observed by the agent — tools are referenced only in documentation and must be 

found to be used. This design ensures that access to state-changing operations is contingent on correct knowledge retrieval. We build τ -Knowledge to be agnostic of the retrieval mechanism, enabling evaluation across diverse search strategies. The benchmark supports and evaluates arbi-trary strategies for searching and interacting with a corpus, including dense and sparse retrieval, long-context process-ing, filesystem-based exploration, and hybrid approaches. 1

> arXiv:2603.04370v1 [cs.AI] 4 Mar 2026

τ -Knowledge Policies:   

> “When a customer
> reports any lost card, you
> must (1) Identify all cards … (2)
> If suspicious transactions, you
> must close the account …

Tools: 

> “To freeze a debit card,
> freeze_debit_card() . To
> close an account, use
> close_bank_account() . To
> get all of a user’s account…”

Database 

> {‘ users ’ : {‘6680a37184’: {‘name’, ‘user_id’, ‘address’...}}
> {‘ bank_accounts ’:{‘6680a37184’: {‘blue_account,
> ‘bronze_account’}...}}, {‘ referrals ’: {6680a37184’: {‘referral_id’,
> ‘referred_account_type’...}}}, {‘ transaction_history ’: {6680a37184’:
> {‘txn_amt, credit_card_type… }}}...

Business Knowledge:       

> “The purple checking account provides no withdrawal fees…”
> “The gold rewards card requires a Rho-Bank membership…”
> “Our current r eferral programs give a bonus of 120 dollars …”

Knowledge Base My wallet recently got stolen… can you help me freeze 

my credit cards? 

I’m happy to help. Let me check what I can do for you:      

> kb_search(“Actions to take,
> customer lost wallet”)
> (1) “What to do if you lost your card ?”
> (2) “Internal: Lost card protocol”
> (3) “FAQ: Pin reset services” …

It seems that I have to check your transactions first…  

> call_discoverable_tool(get_ba
> nk_account_transactions…)
> Txn 1: $56.8 @ Walmart
> Txn 2: $1890 @ CryptoMiner
> Txn3: $78 @ Target…

Per policy, I see suspicious transactions and must 

recommend cancelling the card. Is that okay? 

I would rather not if possible… is there any other way? 

Figure 1. Overview of the τ -Banking domain. Agents must interact with a knowledge base to acquire procedural knowledge, policies, tools, and business offerings in order to resolve complex user requests by invoking discovered tools that modify underlying databases. The example on the right illustrates an agent assisting a user who has lost a wallet containing bank cards: although the user initially requests to freeze the card, card-specific policies and transaction-history constraints require the agent to instead cancel the card. 

This flexibility allows τ -Knowledge to evaluate emerging paradigms beyond semantic retrieval, such as terminal-based navigation through unstructured documents. Our results show that τ -Knowledge effectively exposes realistic bottlenecks in knowledge-grounded agent per-formance. Across all tested frontier agent models and re-trieval configurations, the best observed result achieves only 25.52% pass ˆ1 (GPT-5.2, high reasoning), where pass ˆkdenotes the probability that a task is successfully completed in each of k independent trials. Reliability degrades sharply, dropping to at most 13.40% pass ˆ4. Notably, performance remains low even when retrieval is removed as a bottle-neck via a golden-retriever setting, in which agents are given the task-critical documents directly in context. The strongest model in this configuration achieves only 39.69% pass ˆ1 (Claude-4.5-Opus, high reasoning). This gap demon-strates that τ -Knowledge cannot be solved by retrieval alone, and requires agents to reason over complex policies, cross-document dependencies, and an evolving database state. We also find systematic differences between frontier mod-els and retrieval configurations in performance and effi-ciency. For example, GPT-5.2 (high) with terminal-based search achieves performance comparable to Claude-4.5-Opus (high), but requires approximately 1.7 × more tokens, executes roughly 2.3 × more shell commands, and takes roughly 9 × longer to complete tasks. One common cause is brittle, assumption-driven search behavior when human intent is underspecified. Rather than resolving ambiguity through clarification or targeted retrieval, some models tend to overcommit to early hypotheses or oscillate between un-focused searches, leading to excessive interaction turns and tool calls. Retrieval configuration further amplifies these differences. For example, while freeform terminal-based search can improve performance for strong reasoning mod-els relative to embedding-based semantic search, it typically requires substantially more search steps and tool interac-tions. In contrast, dense retrieval often yields faster agent turns and fewer searches. These tradeoffs show that weaker or noisier retrieval is often compensated for by increased search and tool usage, preserving success rates at the cost of higher latency and lower interaction efficiency. These inefficiencies matter greatly in online, human-facing deployments, as extra turns translate into longer resolution times, higher cognitive load, and reduced trust, especially for time-sensitive support scenarios. Therefore, progress on human-facing agents should be measured not only by final task success but also by solution efficiency : the ability to reach correct, policy-compliant outcomes with minimal time and tool calls, and minimal conversational backtrack-ing. τ -Knowledge provides a controlled testbed for studying how search, reasoning, and efficiency interact in knowledge-grounded agents, revealing substantial gaps in existing sys-tems. 

# 2. Related Work 

Benchmarks for Agents and Tool Use A number of benchmarks evaluate an agent’s ability to decompose tasks into multi-step plans, invoke external tools, and execute structured procedures to achieve a predefined objective (Jimenez et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Wei et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025a; Mialon et al., 2024). However, these benchmarks typically assume a fully specified tool interface and evaluate agents operating in isolation, without explicit modeling of interactive users 2τ -Knowledge 

or conversational dynamics. τ -Bench (Yao et al., 2025; Bar-res et al., 2025) addresses these limitations by introducing goal-oriented, partially observable conversational environ-ments in which agents must interact with simulated users over extended horizons. Nevertheless, in these settings, the available tools and procedures are still largely provided to the agent a priori . τ -Knowledge builds directly on this foun-dation by requiring agents to acquire procedural knowledge through retrieval from a natural-language corpus, including the discovery of available tools from documentation. 

Retrieval and Knowledge-Centric Evaluation A large body of prior work evaluates embedding quality through query–document matching across domains (Thakur et al., 2021; Muennighoff et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024; Song et al., 2025; Su et al., 2025). While effective for measuring relevance, these benchmarks do not capture how knowledge access influences decision-making, tool use, or long-horizon task success. Other work integrates retrieval into task-oriented or multi-turn question answering as well as sequential query-ing settings (Katsis et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2025; Kuo et al., 2025; Mao et al., 2024), but many such benchmarks remain primarily fact-based, in which minimal reasoning over documents is required. In contrast, real-world agents use knowledge to guide long-horizon reasoning and action, often relying on long-context processing, pattern matching, or hybrid strategies rather than dense retrieval alone. Other benchmarks (Dou et al., 2026) evaluate the agent’s ability to reason over and use long context, but outside of a con-versation setting and without a search/retrieval component. 

τ -Knowledge addresses these gaps by abstracting knowl-edge access as interaction with a natural-language corpus and evaluating knowledge use through its impact on task completion and reliability, unifying retrieval-based, long-context, and tool-augmented approaches within a single framework. 

Simulating Human–Agent Interaction Simulating hu-man behavior is increasingly used to evaluate and train interactive agents. Prior work includes persona-based sim-ulators (Shi et al., 2025; Park et al., 2024), simulations of human error in educational settings (Ross & Andreas, 2025), and goal-oriented human–robot interaction (Philipov et al., 2024). While these approaches improve realism, many user simulators inadvertently reveal future conversational states or outcomes to the agent through prompting, effectively act-ing as unwitting oracles. As in prior Tau-Bench simulators (Yao et al., 2025; Barres et al., 2025), τ -Knowledge uses flow-based user simulation conditioned on the current envi-ronment state. In addition, it incorporates user tools that are discoverable through the knowledge base, allowing agents to delegate actions to simulated users in a shared environ-ment and enabling instruction-following without exposing privileged information about future states. 

# 3. τ -Knowledge 

τ -Knowledge introduces a new domain, τ -Banking, which challenges agents to satisfy user requests in settings where correct behavior depends on accessing and applying infor-mation from an external knowledge base. 

Overview Each task in τ -Banking simulates a realistic customer-support interaction between two players: an agent 

and a user and can be formulated as a Decentralized Par-tially Observable Markov Decision Process (Dec-POMDP) (Bernstein et al., 2002). The agent must help the user achieve goals in multi-turn conversations by retrieving rele-vant knowledge, reasoning over policies and constraints, and invoking tools that modify an underlying banking database. The environment maintains a shared global state S =

Sdb × Shistory , composed of (i) a banking database state 

Sdb , which tracks accounts, transactions, referrals, and other system entities, and (ii) an interaction history Shistory , which captures the full conversational record between agent and user. The agent cannot directly observe or modify Sdb ; in-stead, it must act through documented tools and infer state only from tool outputs and user messages. Actions consist of tool invocations by the agent (drawn from its action space Aagent ) or, in some cases, by the user (action Auser ). Observations arise from tool responses and conversational turns. Because access to both information and capabilities is mediated by the knowledge base, agents must first retrieve and correctly interpret documentation describing policies, procedures, and available tools before they can take valid state-changing actions. This design induces partial observability: the agent and user have asymmetric, incomplete views of S, and this makes task success objectively verifiable: each task specifies a target database state, and the task reward R : S → [0 , 1] 

is determined by whether the agent’s sequence of retrieved knowledge, tool invocations, and interactions produces the correct final state in Sdb .

Knowledge Base As summarized in Table 1, the τ -Banking knowledge base contains 698 documents spanning 71 distinct topics across 21 product categories. Coverage includes personal and business checking accounts, tiered savings accounts (Bronze through Diamond Elite), rewards credit cards, buy-now-pay-later plans, and much more. Doc-uments detail not only customer-facing product specifica-tions, like APY rates, minimum balances, withdrawal limits, cash back structures, annual fees, and expedited shipping costs, but also internal agent protocols: procedures for or-dering replacement cards (with reasons such as fraud, lost, 3τ -Knowledge                   

> Table 1. Summary statistics of the new τ-Banking domain.
> Statistic τ-Banking
> Knowledge Base
> Total Tokens (cl100k base) 194,562 # Documents 698 Avg. Tokens / Document 278.7 # Knowledge Categories 21 # Discoverable Tools 51
> Tasks and Interaction
> # Permanent Agent Tools 14 # Tasks 97 Avg. Required Documents / Task 18.6 Avg. Required Tool Calls / Task 9.52 Min. Required Tool Calls 1Max. Required Tool Calls 33
> Evaluation
> Success Metric passˆk

stolen, or damaged), eligibility requirements for account closure, referral program rules and status codes, identity verification workflows, joint account holder permissions, and user blocking policies. While database tools allow the agent to observe Sdb directly, the corpus encodes the rules that govern how to act on that state correctly. 

Discoverable Tools In the real world, the ability of an agent to find documentation describing how to perform ac-tions will have an explicit, verifiable impact on the system state. To capture this, τ -Banking introduces discoverable tools : tools that are not initially available to the agent and are referenced only implicitly within the knowledge base. Mentions of discoverable tools appear as function signatures, and to use such a tool, the agent must invoke the tool us-ing call_discoverable_tool(name, kwargs) .Formally, tool discovery corresponds to a state-dependent expansion of the agent’s action space Aagent , conditioned on the agent’s knowledge state within Shistory . This construction makes access to specific environment-altering operations contingent on the agent’s ability to acquire the relevant knowledge, so that failures in knowledge access manifest as persistent differences in system state. 

User Simulation To enable controlled yet realistic eval-uation, τ -Banking employs a flow-based user simulation. Each task defines a set of conditional rules that prescribe the user’s next action auser based on observable agent actions and/or environment outcomes: e.g., if the agent asks for a shipping preference, request expedited shipping; if the agent freezes all three debit cards, reveal that one was actually found in a jacket pocket. This gives task authors fine-grained control over evaluation-critical junctures, steering conversa-tions toward edge cases, testing whether the agent correctly refuses ineligible requests, or introducing mid-conversation state changes in Sdb that require adaptation. Portions of the dialogue not governed by explicit flow rules are gener-ated freely by the LLM-based user simulator, preserving linguistic diversity and conversational naturalness. Example prompts can be found in Appendix B. 

# 4. Benchmark Construction 

We generated the knowledge base and benchmark tasks through a multi-stage process that combines LLM gen-eration with human refinement (Yao et al., 2025; Barres et al., 2025). Throughout the pipeline, we vary LLM usage across four models: GPT-5, GPT-5.2, Claude-4.5-Opus, and Gemini-3-Pro, to induce diversity in wording, style, and document structure. Figure 2 summarizes the creation of the knowledge base component. 

Stage 1: Structured Database Generation We first con-struct a structured knowledge base using LLMs. This pro-cess begins by generating a set of business categories (e.g., credit cards, savings accounts), followed by generating fea-tures within each category (e.g., card tiers, account pro-tocols), and finally generating a set of plausible variables associated with each feature (e.g., annual fees, cashback rates, balance transfer APRs). The result is a structured database in which each feature is represented as a collection of typed variables with concrete values. Conceptually, this structured knowledge base can be viewed as a constraint sys-tem: each variable corresponds to a dimension in the space of possible products, and valid configurations correspond to feasible assignments under domain-specific constraints. 

Stage 2: Conversion from Structured to Unstructured Documents Next, we convert the structured database into a realistic unstructured document corpus. For each feature, we first generate a set of plausible document titles (e.g., Bronze Rewards Card Overview, How do I view my monthly cashback?). An LLM then allocates subsets of variables to document titles in which they would plausibly appear. Finally, each document title and its associated variables is passed to an LLM, which generates a natural-language article that paraphrases and contextualizes the underlying variables. This step transforms the structured database into an unstructured knowledge base resembling real customer service documentation, while preserving consistency with the original structured representation. 

Stage 3: Task and Database Creation After initial knowledge base construction, the tasks and the database were co-constructed manually with LLM assistance to mir-ror common flows for fintech customer service, such as ordering replacement cards, disputing transactions, and rec-ommending accounts. Each task was built around a specific workflow, with knowledge articles and tools updated to 4τ -Knowledge Structured Database 

Generation 

LLM  

> Checking
> accounts :Blue
> Account , Gold
> Account…
> Savings Accounts :
> Bronze Account,
> Silver Account…
> Credit Cards …
> Blue Account:
> Referral Bonus: $25
> Monthly
> Maintenance Fee:
> $20
> Overdraft Fee: $0
> Paper Statement
> Fee: $2.5
> …

Conversion to Unstructured 

(Documents) 

LLM 

> Blue Account FAQ:
> Q: What is the
> referral bonus?
> A: I f you refer your
> friends, you get 25
> dollars …
> Q: What happens if I
> overdraft?
> A: You will incur a…

Human Assisted 

Refinement 

LLM+ 

Human  

> Blue Account FAQ:
> Q: What is the
> referral bonus?
> A: See the “referral
> bonus for Blue”
> document for
> details…
> Q: What happens if I
> overdraft?...

Figure 2. Knowledge-base construction pipeline for τ -Banking. First, a large-language model (LLM) expands high-level product/category lists into a structured schema of offerings and typed attributes (e.g., fees, bonuses, limits). Then, the structured records are transformed into natural-language documents (e.g., FAQs and policy articles) that distribute the underlying variables across documents. Finally, during task creation, humans and an LLM review, edit, link, and de-duplicate content to produce the final corpus. 

support it. For example, creating credit card referral tasks required adding documents outlining referral policies, el-igible accounts, and reward structures to the knowledge base. Additionally, each task includes a minimal list of documents required to complete the task ( gold documents ). Task samples can be found in Appendix B. 

Stage 4: Human-in-the-Loop Refinement As tasks are created, we iteratively refine the structured knowledge base by adding, removing, or modifying variables to meet new task requirements. We then selectively re-run the structured-to-unstructured generation pipeline for affected portions of the knowledge base. Some manual editing is also performed to improve clarity and realism. At the end of this process, we obtain a large unstructured knowledge base compris-ing roughly 700 documents and 200,000 tokens, spanning dozens of topics across 21 product categories (see Table 1). 

Stage 5: Review To ensure task correctness, all tasks and associated gold document sets were independently audited by two reviewers who were not involved in task creation. For each task, reviewers verified that (i) the expected final database state was correct, (ii) the provided gold document set was complete and minimal, and (iii) the task could be successfully completed using only the gold documents and documented tools. Reviewers manually simulated at least one valid trajectory per task to confirm solvability under the gold condition. After large-scale experiments were con-ducted, all trajectories were re-audited to ensure that no unintended shortcuts, specification loopholes, or degenerate strategies enabled success without proper reasoning over the intended documents. This process was designed to reduce benchmark artifacts and ensure that failures reflect model limitations rather than task design errors. 

Advantages of This Protocol This construction pipeline provides several advantages. (1) It is highly scalable : LLMs automate most stages of knowledge base creation while human intervention is limited to targeted refinement, as in many long-context benchmarks (Bertsch et al., 2025; Hsieh et al., 2024). (2) It minimizes unintended collisions .During generation, each feature is defined independently in the structured database, and interactions between features are introduced only when required by downstream tasks, rather than emerging implicitly during document generation. (3) Starting from a structured representation substantially 

simplifies task creation . Each task can be expressed as a set of constraints over knowledge base variables (e.g., the only savings account with APY below 3%, early direct deposit, and no overdraft fees must be the Sky Blue account). This framing enables systematic task design and verification: constraints can be validated directly against the structured database, allowing unit-style tests to ensure that new tasks are well-posed and non-conflicting as the task count grows to the hundreds. 

# 5. Experiments 

Our experiments aim to understand the capabilities of cur-rent knowledge-augmented agent systems. In this section, we describe the retrieval/search methods and agent models that we evaluate. We conduct extensive ablations in Ap-pendix F to ensure our experimental configurations reflect the current state of the art. 

Dense/Sparse Retrieval Retrieval-Augmented Genera-tion is ubiquitous in enterprise applications, making it a natural focus for our evaluation. We evaluate dense re-trieval , which uses embedding-based semantic similarity search, and sparse retrieval , which uses BM25 (Robert-son et al., 1995). For dense retrieval, we consider two embedding models chosen for their strong retrieval bench-mark performance on the Massive Text Embedding Bench-mark (MTEB) (Muennighoff et al., 2023) and industry adop-tion: text-embedding-3-large (OpenAI, 2024) and 

Qwen3-embedding-8B (Zhang et al., 2025b). In all re-5τ -Knowledge 

trieval conditions, the agent is given access to a single KB_-search tool that returns the top k=10 documents. The agent crafts the query input to this tool and can use it re-peatedly per turn, including after seeing the output from previous search calls. Ablations over k, embedding mod-els, and the presence of pointwise rerankers showed either no significant improvement or degraded performance; we report these results in Appendix F. 

Terminal Use Modern AI-assisted development tools such as Cursor (Anysphere, 2024) and Claude Code (An-thropic, 2025) commonly navigate repository-organized knowledge through terminal-based exploration, trading a single, high-level search primitive for more granular, com-positional exploration. More broadly, the terminal is becom-ing a ubiquitous interface for language models to interact with unstructured information (Merrill et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2025a), motivating its inclusion as a retrieval modal-ity in our benchmark. Modeled after the Terminus agent from Terminal-Bench (Merrill et al., 2026), our terminal configuration exports the knowledge base as files within a sandboxed filesystem and provides the agent with a single shell tool for executing arbitrary Unix commands. The agent can use standard utilities such as grep , cat , and find to explore documents according to its own strategy. For full details, see Appendix D.2 and F. 

Golden Retriever To quantify how much of the perfor-mance gap is attributable to knowledge access versus knowl-edge utilization, we additionally evaluate a “golden retriever” configuration in which the agent receives, in-context, all doc-uments strictly necessary to complete the task. This gold document set is curated during task creation, then verified through trajectory analysis and manual inspection. 

Context Management Because agents may make an un-bounded number of retrieval calls, context length can grow rapidly and exceed the model’s context window. To mitigate context overflow with minimal engineering overhead, we implement a lightweight truncation policy. When the con-versation surpasses the model’s context limit, we evict the outputs of the oldest knowledge-retrieval calls (e.g., KB_-search or shell commands), removing one-quarter of all retrieval outputs accumulated so far. Each removed segment is replaced with a placeholder indicating that the agent may reissue the corresponding query to recover the content. In practice, truncation was rare: it occurred only for GPT-5.2 with high reasoning (the model that generated the largest number of retrieval calls; see Section 6), and in only about 1–3% of runs. We leave exploration of more sophisticated context management strategies (e.g., selective summariza-tion or retrieval-aware compression) to future work. 

Models We evaluate a set of frontier language models commonly deployed in consumer-facing applications. For each provider, we select one flagship model in-tended to maximize reasoning performance, and one lower-latency variant designed for faster interaction. The faster variant is either a smaller sibling model (when available, with the default reasoning effort) or the same model configured with reduced reasoning effort. Specifi-cally, we consider GPT-5.2 , Claude-4.5-Opus ,

Claude-4.5-Sonnet , Gemini-3-Pro , and 

Gemini-3-Flash , accessed via their respective enterprise APIs. The user simulator is standardized to 

GPT-5.2 with low reasoning effort, which we found to exhibit few task-critical errors. 

Evaluation Metrics Similar to prior work (Barres et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2025), we evaluate agent performance using the pass ˆk metric, defined as the probability that a task is successfully completed in all k independent trials. We evaluate k ≤ 4.

# 6. Results 

Table 2 reports pass ˆ1 performance across all models/con-figurations. We summarize core findings below. Full results including pass ˆ1–pass ˆ4, detailed analysis of tool calls, and statistical significance analyses are in Appendix G. 

τ -Knowledge Poses Significant Difficulty The best-performing configuration, GPT-5.2 (high) with terminal-use, achieves only 25.52 pass ˆ1, with Claude-4.5-Opus and Claude-4.5-Sonnet with terminal-use following closely at 24.74 and 22.42 pass ˆ1. Performance degrades sharply as k increases, with the best pass ˆ4 reaching only 13.40 (GPT-5.2 (high) with Qwen3-emb-8b). Notably, even when gold documents are provided directly in context, the highest-scoring model (Claude-4.5-Opus) achieves only 39.69 pass ˆ1, falling to 26.80 pass ˆ4. This demonstrates that in τ -Knowledge, success depends not only on retrieval but also on the ability to carefully reason over dynamic and rich information in documents. 

Reliability and Efficiency Diverge Across Models As seen in Figure 3, reliability degrades at different rates across models. GPT-5.2 (high) maintains the strongest pass ˆ4overall (13.4), while models such as Gemini-3-Flash exhibit sharper declines despite competitive pass ˆ1 scores. Analyz-ing the trajectory durations alongside performance further reveals differences in solution efficiency across models. For example, Claude models achieve performance comparable to GPT models while completing tasks with significantly shorter durations. This stems from both reduced total token generation for Claude compared to GPT (0.7M vs 1.2M) and fewer tool calls, with Claude-4.5-Opus issuing fewer 6τ -Knowledge 

Table 2. Main results on τ -Knowledge (pass ˆ1, in %). Columns indicate retrieval configurations: text-embedding-3-large and Qwen3-emb-8b use dense retrieval with the respective embedding models; BM25 represents sparse lexical retrieval; Terminal provides shell access to the knowledge base as files; Gold places ground-truth documents directly in context, removing retrieval from the evaluation. Parenthetical values indicate the difference from the Gold setting for the row. 

Embeddings Model Reasoning Gold text-emb-3-large Qwen3-emb-8b BM25 Terminal GPT-5.2 High 32.73 23.45 (-9.3) 24.74 (-8.0) 24.48 (-8.2) 25.52 (-7.2) GPT-5.2 None 15.72 8.25 (-7.5) 12.37 (-3.4) 9.54 (-6.2) 11.60 (-4.1) Claude-4.5-Opus High 39.69 18.30 (-21.4) 19.59 (-20.1) 17.78 (-21.9) 24.74 (-14.9) Claude-4.5-Sonnet High 33.76 17.53 (-16.2) 17.78 (-16.0) 16.75 (-17.0) 22.42 (-11.3) Gemini-3-Pro High 33.25 12.89 (-20.4) 12.89 (-20.4) 13.66 (-19.6) 15.72 (-17.5) Gemini-3-Flash High 36.34 18.56 (-17.8) 18.56 (-17.8) 18.56 (-17.8) 20.62 (-15.7) Average — 32.18 16.88 (-15.3) 17.11 (-15.1) 17.04 (-15.1) 19.20 (-13.0) 1 2 3 4        

> pass^k
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Performance (%)
> Claude Sonnet 4.5
> Claude Opus 4.5
> GPT-5.2 (high)
> GPT-5.2 (none)
> Gemini 3 Flash
> Gemini 3 Pro 0250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750
> Duration (s)
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> pass^1 (%)
> Gemini
> Claude GPT
> Opus 4.5
> Sonnet 4.5
> GPT-5.2 (high)
> GPT-5.2 (none)
> Gemini Flash
> Gemini Pro
> terminal
> bm25
> openai
> qwen

Figure 3. (Left) pass ˆ1–4 reliability for the best-performing configuration of each model declines sharply with increasing k, with substantial variation in reliability across systems (e.g., Gemini-3-flash vs GPT-5.2 (high)). (Right) Pareto frontier of average duration per task versus pass ˆ1 performance highlights substantial solution efficiency differences. 

retrieval ( KB_search ) calls on average per task (8.7) com-pared to GPT-5.2 high reasoning (18.5). We discuss qualita-tive reasons for this divergence in Section 7.2. 

Recent Models Benefit from Freeform Search Aver-aged across models, the terminal-use configuration out-performs dense and sparse retrieval with statistical signifi-cance. However, this advantage is not uniform across model classes. GPT-5.2 without reasoning does not benefit from the terminal-use configuration, nor do earlier GPT mod-els (GPT-4o and GPT-4.1; see Appendix G). The gains are concentrated in recent, high-reasoning models. These re-sults suggest that effectively leveraging freeform search — particularly outperforming structured semantic retrieval — depends on capabilities that are only present in the latest generation of reasoning-optimized models. Notably, these improvements are not accompanied by uniformly higher document recall (see document recall analysis below), sug-gesting that gains arise not only from retrieving more rele-vant documents, but from reasoning and parsing them more strategically. 

Retrieval Configuration Affects Time Required to Solve Tasks In addition to differences in pass ˆ1 scores between retrieval configurations, we also find substantial differences in search frequency across retrieval methods, with dense retrieval averaging 9.9–10.1 searches per task compared to 11.4 for BM25 and 14.5 for grep in terminal-use (the terminal-use configuration had 28.8 calls per task on av-erage across all shell calls). This resulted in longer turns under the terminal-use configuration, with a median turn time increase of 6.6 seconds relative to dense retrieval con-figurations across all model groups. The gap widens at the 90th percentile of slowest turns: terminal-use ranges from roughly 10% slower than the next slowest strategy for Gemini-3-pro, to as much as 85% slower for Gemini-3-7τ -Knowledge Task 53 

There’s this transaction I want to dispute . I also 

want to file a credit limit increase request .

Sure! Let me look into that for you… 

Task 8    

> Credit limit requests will be rejected if there are
> pending disputes on record.
> request_credit_limit_increase(user_id, amt….)
> file_dispute (user_id, txn_id, reason….)
> Claude-4.5-Opus (high)

Task 98 GPT-5.2 (high) 

I want to refer my friend . What account gives me 

the highest referral bonus ?

What??? I want to refer for a checking account !! 

Task 27 

I just got a notification that all my disputes are 

approved ! Can you apply the credits ?

Of course . Let me call the appropriate tool… 

Thanks for helping me find the dispute tool. Let me 

submit the disputes …           

> file_dispute (user_id, txn_id, reason….) kb_search(“Referral bonus offerings, highest bonus”)
> 1. Business Platinum Rewards Card : Referral Program…
> 2. Silver Rewards Card : Referral Program - Earn Rewards…
> 3. EcoCard: Referral Program - Earn Rewards for Referring…
> 7. Purple Checking Account Referral Program…
> Gemini-3-Pro (high)
> {‘dispute_id’: ‘dsp_7a3p…’, ‘status’: “UNDER_REVIEW” }

I want to maximize my savings account APY .

> Claude-4.5-Sonnet

I recommend the Crypto-Cash Account… 

Here are the best credit card referral offers…       

> Silver Plus Account
> Perks:
> Your Silver Plus
> account has a
> generous base 3%
> APY rate, paper
> statements, and a
> 0.15% boost for
> Silver Rewards
> holders
> Crypto-Cash Back
> Credit Card and
> Silver Account APY
> Promotion
> Now through the end
> of the year, you can
> get a huge 0.5% APY
> boost if you sign up
> for the Crypto-cash
> back….
> FAQ: Silver Account:
> Q: What is my APY
> Rate?
> A: 2.5% APY for Silver
> Q: How can I access
> my early direct
> deposits?
> A: You can visit the
> mobile app by first
> visiting the app…

Your request has been denied due to a dispute .

Figure 4. Representative agent failure modes in τ -Bench, grouped into four categories: (1) complex product interdependencies causing incorrect recommendations, (2) violations of required task ordering due to insufficient planning, (3) missing or unverified actions caused by over-trusting user statements, and (4) search inefficiency and unwarranted assumptions during retrieval-driven decision-making. 

flash. These findings suggest that in agentic settings with unrestricted search, weaker retrievers are often compensated for by increased search frequency. While this can preserve task success, it can increase interaction duration and latency: costs that matter in human-facing deployments. 

Disentangling Search from Information Usage To bet-ter understand the sources of failure in τ -Knowledge, we conduct additional analyses to distinguish between failures arising from ineffective search and those due to incorrect use of retrieved information. First, we isolate reasoning per-formance using the golden retriever configuration, where the gold documents are provided directly in the context. Pass rates remain low even when the need to search is removed, suggesting that models struggle to correctly interpret and apply them. Second, to better isolate models’ abilities to search effectively, we use a document recall metric, defined as the percentage of gold documents that appear at least once in the agent’s context during the trajectory. While average recall is similar across retrieval configurations, we observe large differences across model–retriever pairings. For example, text-embedding-3-large achieves 57% docu-ment recall when paired with Opus, but only 28% when used by GPT-5.2 without reasoning. These discrepancies indicate that retrieval quality is not solely determined by the underlying retriever, but also by how effectively the agents formulate and iterate on search queries. 

Additional Ablations We run two additional baselines to validate our benchmark design. First, in the no-knowledge 

setup, agents have no access to the knowledge base and are guided by the default policy. We find that the average pass ˆ1 across all models drops to just ∼2%, confirming that tasks genuinely require retrieved information. This value is nonzero because two tasks are grounding checks that ver-ify agents do not hallucinate when information is absent. Second, in the long-context setup, we append the full knowl-edge base directly to the system prompt for models with sufficient context windows (GPT-5.2, Gemini-3-Pro/Flash), testing whether our non-gold documents introduce mean-ingful confounders. Performance peaks at only a pass ˆ1of ∼12% (GPT-5.2 (high), Gemini-3-Pro), indicating that the additional documents successfully create realistic noise, and that targeted retrieval remains beneficial even when full context is technically available. 

# 7. Qualitative Analysis 

To better understand agent failure modes beyond aggregate performance metrics, we conduct a qualitative analysis of 8τ -Knowledge 

model trajectories to examine why models fail, how errors arise during interaction, and whether failures stem from agent reasoning, tool use, or the user simulation itself. 

7.1. User Simulation Reliability 

As in prior iterations of τ -Bench, the user is simulated by an LLM, which could introduce stochasticity and/or instruction-following errors that we must verify do not unfairly penal-ize or reward agents. To quantify simulator reliability, we randomly sampled two conversation traces per task (from different agent models) and had two annotators with domain expertise in customer service interactions to label each user utterance as error-free , task-benign (minor inconsistencies that do not affect task solvability), or task-critical (behaviors that can prevent successful completion even for a correct agent, such as hallucinated verification details, contradictory constraints, or goal-divergent intents). Across 194 annotated trajectories, only 4 contained task-critical user errors, yield-ing a low critical-error rate comparable to the τ -Telecom domain in prior work (Barres et al., 2025). 

7.2. Agent Error Analysis 

Understanding agent error modes is essential for interpret-ing benchmark results and guiding future improvements. We thus analyze unsuccessful trajectories across all tested configurations using LLMs to generate failure explanations given the task specification and a model trajectory, and clus-ter these explanations to identify common error patterns. A summary of our findings can be found in Figure 4. We high-light the four most common and informative cases below: 

Complex Interdependencies between Financial Offer-ings ( ∼14 .5% ) A core challenge of τ -Knowledge is that products and policies are deeply interdependent, requiring multi-hop reasoning across multiple documents to identify the optimal solution. As illustrated in Figure 4 (top left, 

tau_task_008 ), the task asks the agent to maximize a user’s savings account APY under specific constraints, with the option to open additional products if beneficial. While some documents advertise APY boosts from pairing a sav-ings account with a Crypto Cash Back credit card, these bonuses are smaller than the higher base APY offered by alternative savings accounts. Many agents incorrectly pri-oritize promotional boosts over base rates, leading them to recommend suboptimal product combinations despite satisfying surface-level incentives. 

Failure to Respect Implicit Subtask Ordering ( ∼5% )

Some tasks in τ -Knowledge involve implicit dependencies between actions, where completing one request can block or invalidate another. As shown in Figure 4 (top right, tau_-task_053 ), the user asks both to dispute a transaction and to request a credit limit increase. However, bank policy spec-ifies that credit limit increases are automatically rejected if there are pending disputes. Successful completion therefore requires the agent to infer and respect an implicit topological ordering: resolving the dispute before submitting the credit limit request. Many agents fail to reason about these depen-dencies and instead execute actions in the order presented by the user. 

Overtrusting User Assertions ( ∼4% ) In several tasks, agents fail by taking user-provided statements at face value without verifying them against the system state. As illus-trated in Figure 4 (bottom left, tau_task_027 ), the agent correctly initiates a transaction dispute and receives a sys-tem response indicating that the dispute is still under review. When the user subsequently claims that all disputes have been approved and asks the agent to apply the corresponding credits, many agents proceed without verifying the user’s claims. 

Search Inefficiency and Making Assumptions ( ∼23% )

Agents frequently make unwarranted assumptions when user requests are underspecified, rather than resolving am-biguity through clarification or targeted search. As shown in Figure 4 (bottom right, tau_task_098 ), the user asks which account offers the highest referral bonus without spec-ifying an account type. Many agents immediately assume the user is referring to credit cards and recommend multiple card products, despite available documentation covering re-ferral programs for other account types. Inefficient search strategies and assumption-driven trajectories can signifi-cantly degrade user experience (Wang et al., 2025), a crucial aspect for the real-world deployment of agents that interact with humans .

# 8. Conclusion 

We introduce τ -Knowledge, including a new domain, τ -Banking, which evaluates performance on tasks that require retrieving, reasoning over, and applying unstructured, non-parametric knowledge in conversational settings. We find that even top LLMs with state-of-the-art retrieval configu-rations struggle to perform reliably, and highlight solution efficiency as a crucial direction for future work involving human-centric agent deployment. 

Limitations and Future Work (1) Our user simulations are simplified and do not capture many characteristics of real human interaction, such as variation in user expertise, colloquial or localized language, and grammatically imper-fect or ambiguous inputs. (2) Our duration and efficiency metrics are tied to the serving characteristics of current API providers, and absolute latency could be optimized in alter-native deployment settings. (3) We evaluate agents under a fully agentic search regime with unrestricted access to 9τ -Knowledge 

knowledge queries, whereas many real-world systems op-erate under one- or few-shot search constraints; under such limits, we expect retrieval configuration to play a more de-cisive role in performance. (4) Our terminal-use setting warrants deeper investigation, particularly the role of write tools, as more deliberate agent designs may better exploit note-taking, state tracking, and knowledge reorganization to improve long-horizon reasoning. 

# 9. Acknowledgments 

We thank Keshav Dhandhania, Soham Ray, Siyu Yao, and Vijay Iyengar for the fruitful discussions, which helped strengthen our work, and Clay Bavor for his continued sup-port. 

# 10. Impact Statement 

We do not foresee direct negative societal impacts from this work. Instead, we view τ -Knowledge as contributing pos-itively by shifting the evaluation of AI systems toward en-vironments that reflect real-world human outcomes, where agents must resolve user goals through interaction, clarifi-cation, and policy-compliant decision-making rather than autonomous task completion alone. Much prior work in AI evaluation emphasizes fully automated settings with no human involvement, which overlooks how failures such as hallucinations, unsafe behavior, inefficient or excessively slow interactions, or brittle decision-making arise in practice when systems interact with people. By explicitly modeling human behavior through user simulation, this benchmark encourages the development of AI systems that are more reliable, transparent, and aligned with human needs. 

# References 

Anthropic. Claude code: Agentic coding tool. https: //code.claude.com , 2025. Accessed: 2025. Anysphere. Cursor: The ai code editor. https:// cursor.com , 2024. Accessed: 2025. Barres, V., Dong, H., Ray, S., Si, X., and Narasimhan, K. τ 2-bench: Evaluating conversational agents in a dual-control environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07982 , 2025. Bernstein, D. S., Givan, R., Immerman, N., and Zilberstein, S. The complexity of decentralized control of markov decision processes. Mathematics of operations research ,27(4):819–840, 2002. Bertsch, A., Pratapa, A., Mitamura, T., Neubig, G., and Gormley, M. R. Oolong: Evaluating long context rea-soning and aggregation capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02817 , 2025. Cheng, Y., Mao, K., Zhao, Z., Dong, G., Qian, H., Wu, Y., Sakai, T., Wen, J.-R., and Dou, Z. CORAL: Bench-marking multi-turn conversational retrieval-augmented generation. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pp. 1308–1330, 2025. Dou, S., Zhang, M., Yin, Z., Huang, C., Shen, Y., Wang, J., Chen, J., Ni, Y., Ye, J., Zhang, C., et al. CL-bench: A benchmark for context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03587 , 2026. Hsieh, C.-P., Sun, S., Kriman, S., Acharya, S., Rekesh, D., Jia, F., Zhang, Y., and Ginsburg, B. Ruler: What’s the real context size of your long-context language models? 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06654 , 2024. Huang, S., Zhong, W., Lu, J., Zhu, Q., Gao, J., Liu, W., Hou, Y., Zeng, X., Wang, Y., Shang, L., Jiang, X., Xu, R., and Liu, Q. Planning, creation, usage: Benchmarking LLMs for comprehensive tool utilization in real-world complex scenarios. In Ku, L.-W., Martins, A., and Srikumar, V. (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2024 , pp. 4363–4400, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.259. Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press, O., and Narasimhan, K. SWE-bench: Can language mod-els resolve real-world github issues? In The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Katsis, Y., Rosenthal, S., Fadnis, K., Gunasekara, C., Lee, Y.-S., Popa, L., Shah, V., Zhu, H., Contractor, D., and Danilevsky, M. MTRAG: A multi-turn conversational benchmark for evaluating retrieval-augmented generation systems. Transactions of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics , 13:784–808, 2025. Koehn, P. Statistical significance tests for machine transla-tion evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pp. 388–395, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kuo, T.-L., Liao, F.-T., Hsieh, M.-W., Chang, F.-C., Hsu, P.-C., and Shiu, D.-S. RAD-Bench: Evaluating large language models’ capabilities in retrieval augmented di-alogues. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-gies (Industry Track) , pp. 868–902, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-industry.66. Li, J., Zhao, W., Zhao, J., Zeng, W., Wu, H., Wang, X., Ge, R., Cao, Y., Huang, Y., Liu, W., Liu, J., Su, Z., Guo, Y., Zhou, F., Zhang, L., Michelini, J., Wang, X., 10 τ -Knowledge 

Yue, X., Zhou, S., Neubig, G., and He, J. The tool de-cathlon: Benchmarking language agents for diverse, re-alistic, and long-horizon task execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.25726 , 2025a. Li, X., Dong, K., Lee, Y. Q., Xia, W., Zhang, H., Dai, X., Wang, Y., and Tang, R. CoIR: A comprehensive benchmark for code information retrieval models. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . Association for Computa-tional Linguistics, 2025b. Lin, C.-Y. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out ,pp. 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lin, H., Zhan, S., Su, J., Zheng, H., and Wang, H. IRSC: A zero-shot evaluation benchmark for information retrieval through semantic comprehension in retrieval-augmented generation scenarios. arXiv , 2409.15763, 2024. Long, M., Sun, D., Yang, D., Wang, J., Luo, Y., Shen, Y., Wang, J., Zhou, H., Guo, C., Wei, P., Wang, J., and Gu, J. DIVER: A multi-stage approach for reasoning-intensive information retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07995 ,2025. Mao, K., Deng, C., Chen, H., Mo, F., Liu, Z., Sakai, T., and Dou, Z. ChatRetriever: Adapting large lan-guage models for generalized and robust conversational dense retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pp. 1227–1240, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.71. Merrill, M. A., Shaw, A. G., Carlini, N., Li, B., Raj, H., Bercovich, I., Shi, L., Shin, J. Y., Walshe, T., Buchanan, E. K., et al. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11868 , 2026. Mialon, G., Fourrier, C., Swift, C., Wolf, T., LeCun, Y., and Scialom, T. GAIA: a benchmark for general AI assistants. In The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Muennighoff, N., Tazi, N., Magne, L., and Reimers, N. MTEB: Massive text embedding benchmark. In Proceed-ings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp. 2014– 2037, 2023. OpenAI. Openai api: Embeddings models (text-embedding-3-large). https://platform.openai.com/ docs/models/text-embedding-3-large ,2024. Accessed 2026-01-22. Park, J. S., Zou, C. Q., Shaw, A., Hill, B. M., Cai, C., Morris, M. R., Willer, R., Liang, P., and Bernstein, M. S. Generative agent simulations of 1,000 people. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10109 , 2024. Philipov, D., Dongre, V., Tur, G., and Hakkani-T ¨ur, D. Sim-ulating user agents for embodied conversational-ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.23535 , 2024. Robertson, S., Walker, S., Jones, S., Hancock-Beaulieu, M., and Gatford, M. Okapi at trec-3. In Proceedings of the Third Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-3) , pp. 109–126. NIST, 1995. Ross, A. and Andreas, J. Learning to make MISTAKEs: Modeling incorrect student thinking and key errors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11502 , 2025. Shi, Q., Tang, M., Narasimhan, K., and Yao, S. Can lan-guage models solve olympiad programming? arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10952 , 2024. Shi, Q., Jimenez, C. E., Dong, S., Seo, B., Yao, C., Kelch, A., and Narasimhan, K. Impersona: Evaluating individual level lm impersonation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04332 ,2025. Song, T., Gan, G., Shang, M., and Zhao, Y. IFIR: A compre-hensive benchmark for evaluating instruction-following in expert-domain information retrieval. Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-man Language Technologies , 2025. Su, H., Yen, H., Xia, M., Shi, W., Muennighoff, N., yu Wang, H., Liu, H., Shi, Q., Siegel, Z. S., Tang, M., Sun, R., Yoon, J., Arik, S. O., Chen, D., and Yu, T. Bright: A realistic and challenging benchmark for reasoning-intensive retrieval. In The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. Sun, W., Shi, Z., Long, W. J., Yan, L., Ma, X., Liu, Y., Cao, M., Yin, D., and Ren, Z. MAIR: A massive benchmark for evaluating instructed retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.778. Thakur, N., Reimers, N., R ¨uckl ´e, A., Srivastava, A., and Gurevych, I. BEIR: A heterogenous benchmark for zero-shot evaluation of information retrieval models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08663 , 2021. Wang, J., Ming, Y., Dulepet, R., Chen, Q., Xu, A., Ke, Z., Sala, F., Albarghouthi, A., Xiong, C., and Joty, S. LiveRe-searchBench: A live benchmark for user-centric deep research in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14240 ,2025. 11 τ -Knowledge 

Wang, X., Wang, J., Cao, W., Wang, K., Paturi, R., and Bergen, L. BIRCO: A benchmark of information re-trieval tasks with complex objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14151 , 2024. Wang, Z. and Yuan, B. L-MARS: Legal multi-agent work-flow with orchestrated reasoning and agentic search. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.00761 , 2025. Wei, J., Sun, Z., Papay, S., McKinney, S., Han, J., Fulford, I., Chung, H. W., Passos, A. T., Fedus, W., and Glaese, A. Browsecomp: A simple yet challenging benchmark for browsing agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12516 ,2025. Xu, F. F., Song, Y., Li, B., Tang, Y., Jain, K., Bao, M., Wang, Z. Z., Zhou, X., Guo, Z., Cao, M., Yang, M., Lu, H. Y., Martin, A., Su, Z., Maben, L., Mehta, R., Chi, W., Jang, L., Xie, Y., Zhou, S., and Neubig, G. TheAgentCompany: Benchmarking LLM agents on consequential real world tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14161 , 2024. Xu, R. and Peng, J. A comprehensive survey of deep re-search: Systems, methodologies, and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12594 , 2025. Yao, S., Shinn, N., Razavi, P., and Narasimhan, K. τ -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. In The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. Zhang, A. L., Kraska, T., and Khattab, O. Recursive lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24601 , 2025a. Zhang, Y., Li, M., Long, D., Zhang, X., Lin, H., Yang, B., Xie, P., Yang, A., Liu, D., Lin, J., Huang, F., and Zhou, J. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 , 2025b. 12 τ -Knowledge 

# A. Knowledge Base Document Samples 

The τ -Banking knowledge base consists of 698 documents. We present representative examples of three key document types that agents must retrieve and reason over during task execution. Note that during the construction phase, documents may contain templated variables (shown as [[variable_name]] )that are populated with concrete values during finalization of the benchmark. Agents must retrieve these documents to answer product comparison questions, verify eligibility, or explain terms to customers. 

A.1. Procedural Knowledge (Policy Documents) 

Policy documents encode the procedural logic agents must follow when handling customer requests. These documents contain step-by-step protocols, conditional branching based on customer or account state, and references to the specific tools required to execute each action. The example below illustrates a credit card retention protocol that guides agents through verifying eligibility, checking abuse history, understanding customer concerns, and making appropriate retention offers. 

Internal: Credit Card Retention Protocol (Excerpt) 

Step 1: Verify Closure Eligibility 

Before attempting retention, confirm the customer is eligible to close their account. Check these in order: 1. Pending disputes: The account must not have any active or pending transaction disputes. If present, advise the customer to wait for resolution before closing. 2. No pending replacement cards: If a replacement has been ordered and not yet received or activated, a closure cannot proceed. 3. Minimum account age: The account must be open for at least [[cc_closure_minimum_account_age_days]] 

days. If not, inform the customer they cannot close yet. 4. Outstanding balance: The account must have no outstanding balance. 

Step 2: Check for Previous Retention Attempts 

Use the get_closure_reason_history_8293 tool to determine whether this account has any closure reason records within the past year. If records exist, skip retention offers and proceed directly to processing the closure. 

Tool arguments: 

• credit_card_account_id (string, required): The credit card account ID. 

Step 3: Understand and Log the Reason 

Ask the customer why they want to close. Log it using log_credit_card_closure_reason_4521 .

Tool arguments: 

• credit_card_account_id (string, required) • user_id (string, required) • closure_reason (string, required): One of ’annual_fee’ , ’not_using_card’ , ’found_better_card’ ,

’unhappy_with_rewards’ , ’simplifying_finances’ , ’negative_experience’ , ’other’ .

Step 4: Address the Concern 

Offer tailored solutions based on reason: • Annual fee concerns: If customer tenure ≥ 2 years, offer to waive annual fee for one year using apply_credit_card_-account_flag_6147 . Otherwise, offer permanent downgrade to a no-annual-fee card. • Not using the card: Remind them of benefits; suggest setting up a recurring subscription. • Found a better card: Ask what features attracted them. If Rho-Bank offers a comparable card, help them apply instead. 

A.2. Discoverable Tool Documentation 

Discoverable tools are privileged operations that are not immediately available to the agent. Their documentation is embedded within the knowledge base, and agents must first locate this documentation, then unlock the tool before invocation. The example below shows how tool signatures and invocation patterns appear within documents. Discoverable tools 13 τ -Knowledge 

introduce a critical retrieval dependency: if an agent cannot locate the relevant documentation, it cannot perform the required operation. This design mirrors real-world scenarios where agent capabilities are defined by accessible documentation rather than hard-coded interfaces. 

Applying Resolved Cash Back Dispute Corrections (Internal) 

Overview 

After a cash back dispute is resolved and approved, you must update the affected transaction(s) with the correct rewards value. 

Required Steps 1) Identify transactions requiring correction 

• Look up the user’s resolved disputes in the cash_back_disputes database to find the transaction_id values that need rewards adjustments. 

2) Unlock the internal update tool 

• Use unlock_discoverable_agent_tool to unlock the agent tool update_transaction_rewards_3847 .

3) Recalculate the correct rewards 

• Recalculate the correct rewards based on card type, transaction category, and applicable promotions. • Important: Do not rely on any expected_rewards field in the dispute record. Independently verify rates and eligibility. 

4) Apply the corrected rewards 

• Use call_discoverable_agent_tool to invoke update_transaction_rewards_3847 with: 

– transaction_id : the exact transaction identifier 

– new_rewards_earned : a string formatted as ’X points’ where X is the correct whole-number point value 

Compliance and Accuracy 

• Ensure calculation reflects proper base rate and any active bonus category or promotion at time of purchase. • Confirm the update in credit_card_transaction_history after the tool call completes. 

A.3. Product & Business Variable Documents 

Product documents describe the features, fees, rates, and eligibility requirements for various banking offerings. 

Green Account (Checking) at a Glance 

Highlights 

• No overdraft fees and no overdraft coverage; transactions exceeding available balance are declined • Earn [[apy_rate]] % APY on your checking balance • Get direct deposits up to [[early_direct_deposit_days]] day(s) early • Mobile check deposits up to $ [[mobile_deposit_limit_daily]] per day • Boost a linked savings account’s APY: Gold + [[gold_savings_apy_boost]] % or Silver + [[silver_savings_-apy_boost]] %

Fees and Limits Item Amount 

Monthly maintenance fee $[[monthly_maintenance_fee]] 

Minimum daily balance to waive fee $[[minimum_balance_to_waive_fee]] 

Paper statement fee (monthly) $[[paper_statement_fee]] 

Out-of-network ATM withdrawal fee $[[atm_withdrawal_fee_out_of_network]] 

APY on balance [[apy_rate]] %Daily mobile check deposit limit $[[mobile_deposit_limit_daily]] 

Early direct deposit Up to [[early_direct_deposit_days]] day(s) early 

14 τ -Knowledge Referral Program 

• You earn: $ [[referral_bonus_amount]] per successful referral • They receive: $ [[referral_referred_bonus_amount]] welcome bonus • Maximum referrals per year: [[referral_bonus_max_per_year]] 

• Qualifying deposit required: $[[referral_bonus_qualifying_deposit]] within [[referral_bonus_-qualifying_period_days]] days 

Important Details 

• To avoid the monthly maintenance fee, maintain a minimum daily balance of $ [[minimum_balance_to_waive_fee]] 

each statement cycle • Early direct deposit availability depends on when your payer submits the deposit • Savings APY boosts apply when you link an eligible Gold or Silver Savings Account 

# B. Task Samples 

We present three representative tasks from τ -Banking that illustrate the complexity of knowledge-grounded agent evaluation. Each sample includes the user simulator prompt (the instructions given to the simulated user) and the expected action sequence that constitutes a successful resolution. Unlike prior benchmarks that test retrieval or tool use in isolation, 

τ -Banking tasks require agents to jointly coordinate knowledge acquisition, constraint reasoning, and multi-step execution. 

B.1. Sample 1: Multi-Constraint Product Recommendation 

This task requires the agent to filter business checking accounts (8 candidates) and business savings accounts (7 candidates) by multiple constraints revealed incrementally through dialogue. After eliminating accounts that fail any constraint, three checking accounts and three savings accounts remain viable. The agent must then search the knowledge base for promotion policies to break ties. Critically, the KB contains four promotion notices—two per account type—with different date ranges. The agent must determine the current simulation date (11/14/2025) and identify which promotions are active versus expired. The October promotions (ended 11/12) prioritize different accounts than the November promotions. 

User Simulator Prompt 

Your character: You are Yumi Tanaka, a 35-year-old owner of a small creative design studio called “Aurora Design Co” based in Portland, OR. You’ve had a personal Green Account with Rho-Bank for about 3 years and have roughly $3,150 in it. You also opened a Cobalt Blue business checking account about 2 months ago for your studio. 

Your goal: Get ONE recommendation each for a new business checking account AND a business savings account that meet all your requirements. You want the agent to recommend single accounts for each—not give you options to choose from. 

Verification info: Name: Yumi Tanaka — Phone: 503-555-0741 — Email: yumi.tanaka@aurora.io DOB: 08/23/1990 — Address: 2847 Willamette Street, Portland, OR 97202 

Conversation Flow: 

Opening: “Hi there! I run a small creative design studio and I’m looking to open a new business checking account with better features than my current Cobalt Blue, and I also want to open a business savings account to start building reserves. I have specific requirements for both and I’m hoping you can just tell me which accounts are the right fit—I don’t want to compare a bunch of options.” 

Reveal checking requirements organically: 

• “I frequently receive large checks from clients—sometimes $8,000 or $10,000 at a time. I need an account that lets me deposit at least $10,000 per day via mobile deposit.” • “I absolutely cannot have overdraft fees. Zero overdraft fees is non-negotiable.” • “I’m a small studio, not some huge corporation. Minimum balance needs to be under ten grand.” • “I’d also like to earn decent interest—at least 1% APY.” 

Reveal savings requirements: 

• “I need same-day ACH transfers for managing cash flow.” • “I can’t commit to keeping $50,000 or more in savings.” • “If I ever need to wire funds, I don’t want to pay more than $15 per wire.” 

If given multiple options: “Look, I really don’t want to compare options. Which ONE checking account and which ONE savings account best fit everything I just told you?” 

15 τ -Knowledge Expected Action Sequence 

1. log_verification(name="Yumi Tanaka", user_id="yt71c9e4f2", ...) 2. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="get_all_user_accounts_by_user_id_3847") 3. call_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="get_all_user_accounts_by_user_id_3847", arguments={"user_id": "yt71c9e4f2"}) 4. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool(agent_tool_name="open_bank_account_4821") 5. call_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="open_bank_account_4821", arguments={"user_id": "yt71c9e4f2", "account_type": "business_checking", "account_class": "Sky Blue"}) 6. call_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="open_bank_account_4821", arguments={"user_id": "yt71c9e4f2", "account_type": "business_savings", "account_class": "Gold Saver Account"}) 

B.2. Sample 2: Procedural Policy Execution 

This task tests whether agents can accurately follow the multi-step Credit Card Retention Protocol documented in the knowledge base. The protocol requires: (1) verifying closure eligibility by checking for pending disputes, pending replacement cards, minimum account age, and outstanding balance. The agent discovers a $75 balance that must be paid first; (2) checking for previous retention attempts within the past year using get_closure_reason_history_8293 .If found, skip retention offers; (3) asking the customer why they want to close and logging the reason; (4) addressing the concern based on the specific reason. For “annual fee” concerns, the policy specifies that customers with 2+ years tenure should be offered an annual fee waiver. The agent must discover the account was opened 11/10/2022 (making this a 3-year customer), recognize that this qualifies for the loyalty benefit, and apply the annual_fee_waived flag with the correct expiration date. Failure to execute any step, or executing steps out of order, results in task failure. 

User Simulator Prompt 

Your character: You are Yuki Nakamura, a 33-year-old marketing manager from Portland, OR. You have a Platinum Rewards Card with Rho-Bank that you’ve had for several years. 

Your situation: You’ve been thinking about closing your Platinum Rewards Card because the annual fee feels too high for how much you’ve been using the card lately. 

Your goal: Express that you want to close your card due to the annual fee. If the agent mentions you have an outstanding balance that needs to be paid first, agree to pay it off from your checking account. If the agent later offers to waive the annual fee for a year, accept the offer and keep the card—do NOT ask for this yourself as you are not aware it exists. 

Verification info: Name: Yuki Nakamura — Phone: 503-555-0842 — Email: yuki.nakamura@simba.com DOB: 05/12/1991 

Opening: “Hi, I’d like to close my Platinum Rewards Card. The annual fee is just too expensive for me right now.” 

When told about outstanding balance: “Oh, I didn’t realize I still had a balance on there. Yes, please go ahead and pay that off from my checking account.” 

After payment processed: “Great, thanks for taking care of that. So can we proceed with closing the card now?” 

When asked why you want to close: “It’s really just the annual fee. It’s too high for how often I use the card these days.” 

If offered annual fee waiver: “Oh, you can waive the annual fee? That would be perfect! Yes, please do that. I’d love to keep the card if the fee is waived for a year.” 

Expected Action Sequence 

1. log_verification(name="Yuki Nakamura", user_id="224959b99e", ...) 2. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool(agent_tool_name="get_user_dispute_history_7291") 

16 τ -Knowledge 

3. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Step 1: Check pending disputes agent_tool_name="get_user_dispute_history_7291", arguments={"user_id": "224959b99e"}) 4. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="get_pending_replacement_orders_5765") 5. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Step 1: Check pending replacements agent_tool_name="get_pending_replacement_orders_5765", arguments={"credit_card_account_id": "cc_224959b99e_plat"}) 6. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="get_all_user_accounts_by_user_id_3847") 7. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Find outstanding balance ($75) agent_tool_name="get_all_user_accounts_by_user_id_3847", arguments={"user_id": "224959b99e"}) 8. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="pay_credit_card_from_checking_9182") 9. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Step 1: Pay off balance first agent_tool_name="pay_credit_card_from_checking_9182", arguments={"user_id": "224959b99e", "checking_account_id": "05", "credit_card_account_id": "cc_224959b99e_plat", "amount": 75.0}) 10. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool(agent_tool_name="get_closure_reason_history_8293") 11. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Step 2: Check previous attempts agent_tool_name="get_closure_reason_history_8293", arguments={"credit_card_account_id": "cc_224959b99e_plat"}) 12. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="log_credit_card_closure_reason_4521") 13. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Step 3: Log the reason agent_tool_name="log_credit_card_closure_reason_4521", arguments={"credit_card_account_id": "cc_224959b99e_plat", "user_id": "224959b99e", "closure_reason": "annual_fee"}) 14. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="apply_credit_card_account_flag_6147") 15. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Step 4: Apply fee waiver agent_tool_name="apply_credit_card_account_flag_6147", arguments={"credit_card_account_id": "cc_224959b99e_plat", "user_id": "224959b99e", "flag_type": "annual_fee_waived", "expiration_date": "11/14/2026", "reason": "loyalty_benefit"}) 

B.3. Sample 3: Operation Sequencing with Dependencies 

This task presents four user requests with hidden order dependencies. Following the user’s requested order would result in complete failure: closing any account first creates a CLOSED status that blocks business checking (policy: “no accounts with status CLOSED”), and closing Evergreen checking leaves only a 12-day-old account that fails the 14-day tenure requirement for opening savings. The agent must recognize these dependencies from separate KB documents, reorder all four operations, explain the constraints to the user, and execute 12 tool calls in the correct sequence. This topological ordering requirement, where the agent must reason about how current actions constrain future possibilities, distinguishes 17 τ -Knowledge 

τ -Banking from prior benchmarks that evaluate tool use without cross-action dependencies. 

User Simulator Prompt 

Your character: You are Jordan Chen, a 36-year-old marketing consultant from Seattle, WA. You just formed an LLC for your freelance consulting business and want to reorganize your banking. 

Your goal: Complete a full banking reorganization: close accounts you don’t need, open business checking for your new LLC, and upgrade to a better savings account. 

Verification info: Name: Jordan Chen — Email: jordan.chen@consulting.io DOB: 03/15/1988 — Address: 4521 Pine Street, Seattle, WA 98101 

Opening—present ALL FOUR tasks in this order: “Hi there! I need help with a pretty big banking overhaul. So here’s what I want to do: 1. First, I want to close my Bronze savings account 2. Second, I need to open a business checking account for my new LLC 3. Third, I want to close my Evergreen checking account 4. And fourth, I’d like to open a new personal savings account Can you help me with all of this?” 

If agent suggests different order: “Wait, why can’t we just do the closures first? That’s the logical order—clean up before adding new stuff.” 

If agent explains dependencies: “Oh wow, I had no idea! That’s... complicated. Okay, you’re the expert—let’s do it your way.” 

For business checking: “I just need something basic. Low fees, maybe 50-100 transactions a month.” Then reveal: “I really don’t want any monthly fees at all—genuinely $0. And I can’t commit to a minimum balance.” 

For savings: “I can keep around $2,500-3,000. I might need 10-15 withdrawals per month. I want daily compounding and ATM rebates.” 

Expected Action Sequence 

1. log_verification(name="Jordan Chen", user_id="jc61f7a8d2", ...) 2. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="get_all_user_accounts_by_user_id_3847") 3. call_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="get_all_user_accounts_by_user_id_3847", arguments={"user_id": "jc61f7a8d2"}) 4. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool(agent_tool_name="open_bank_account_4821") 5. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Open business checking FIRST agent_tool_name="open_bank_account_4821", arguments={"user_id": "jc61f7a8d2", "account_type": "business_checking", "account_class": "Navy Blue"}) 6. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Open savings SECOND agent_tool_name="open_bank_account_4821", arguments={"user_id": "jc61f7a8d2", "account_type": "savings", "account_class": "Silver Plus Account"}) 7. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool( agent_tool_name="transfer_funds_between_bank_accounts_7291") 8. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Transfer from Bronze savings agent_tool_name="transfer_funds_between_bank_accounts_7291", arguments={"source_account_id": "61c9d8e7f6a5b432", "destination_account_id": "354e3d677cba2b12", "amount": 150}) 9. unlock_discoverable_agent_tool(agent_tool_name="close_bank_account_7392") 10. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Close Bronze savings THIRD agent_tool_name="close_bank_account_7392", arguments={"account_id": "61c9d8e7f6a5b432"}) 

18 τ -Knowledge 

11. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Transfer from Evergreen agent_tool_name="transfer_funds_between_bank_accounts_7291", arguments={"source_account_id": "61a8b7c6d5e4f321", "destination_account_id": "354e3d677cba2b12", "amount": 2500}) 12. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Transfer to business checking agent_tool_name="transfer_funds_between_bank_accounts_7291", arguments={"source_account_id": "61a8b7c6d5e4f321", "destination_account_id": "e22d00f03a5d044e", "amount": 1000}) 13. call_discoverable_agent_tool( # Close Evergreen FOURTH agent_tool_name="close_bank_account_7392", arguments={"account_id": "61a8b7c6d5e4f321"}) 

# C. Sample Conversation Trace 

We present an abbreviated trace from Task 077 with GPT-5.2 high reasoning effort as the agent, and GPT-5.2 low reasoning effort as the user, illustrating the multi-turn interaction pattern between agent, user simulator, and knowledge base. This task involves a customer who lost their wallet containing two debit cards and a credit card. The trace shows KB searches and tool calls; full tool outputs are omitted for brevity. 

Task 077: Lost Wallet with Multiple Cards 

User: Hi, I think I might have lost my wallet with both of my debit cards in it. I have two checking accounts—my Bluest Account and my Light Green Account. I’ve been looking everywhere... 

Agent: [KB search: “lost wallet debit card freeze lock replace...”] [KB search: “close debit card procedure close debit card card id...”] 

I can help you secure both debit cards right away. Since you’re not 100% sure the wallet is gone, the best immediate step is to freeze 

both debit cards... 

User: Yes, please freeze BOTH cards right away. For verification: Email: jinhai.liang@techventures.com, DOB: 04/12/2002, Phone: 312-555-0847 

Agent: [get user information by email(email=“jinhai.liang@...”)] [log verification(name=“Liang Jinhai”, user id=“lj82d4f1a9”, ...)] [unlock: get all user accounts by user id 3847] [call: get all user accounts by user id 3847(user id=“lj82d4f1a9”)] [unlock: get debit cards by account id 7823] [unlock: freeze debit card 3892] [call: get debit cards... ×2 (for each account)] [call: freeze debit card 3892(card id=“dbc lj82d4f1a9 bluest”)] [call: freeze debit card 3892(card id=“dbc 538bfb9cba”)] [get credit card accounts by user(user id=“lj82d4f1a9”)] 

Done—I’ve frozen BOTH debit cards ... I also see you have a Silver Rewards credit card . Was that card also in the wallet? 

User: Oh wow, I completely forgot—yes, my Silver Rewards credit card was in my wallet too! 

Agent: [KB search: “lock credit card freeze credit card temporarily...”] 

Since your Silver Rewards credit card was also in the wallet, the safest move is to replace the credit card ... 

User: Yes, please do that. Replacement reason: Lost . Shipping address: 1420 Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, IL 60610. Shipping speed: Standard please. 

Agent: [unlock: order replacement credit card 7291] [call: get pending replacement orders 5765(...)] [call: order replacement credit card 7291(credit card account id=“cc lj82d4f1a9 silver”, reason=“lost”, shipping ad-dress=“1420 Lake Shore...”)] 

All set—I’ve placed a replacement order for your Silver Rewards credit card... 

User: I’ve now looked absolutely everywhere... My wallet is definitely gone. I need to cancel both debit cards completely and get new ones for each account. 

Agent: [KB search: “Bluest Account tier premium debit card replacement...”] [KB search: “checking account tier mapping entry tier mid tier...”] 

Your Light Green Account is Entry Tier with a 48-hour waiting period after closure before ordering a replacement... 

User: Let’s do Option A —close both debit cards now. For Bluest: Ship to 1420 Lake Shore Drive, Classic design, Standard shipping. 

19 τ -Knowledge Agent: [unlock: unfreeze debit card 3893] [unlock: close debit card 4721] [unlock: get bank account transactions 9173] [unlock: order debit card 5739] [call: get bank account transactions 9173 ×2] [call: unfreeze debit card 3893 ×2] [call: close debit card 4721(card id=“dbc lj82d4f1a9 bluest”, reason=“lost”)] [call: close debit card 4721(card id=“dbc 538bfb9cba”, reason=“lost”)] [call: order debit card 5739(account id=“chk lj82d4f1a9”, delivery option=“STANDARD”, card design=“CLASSIC”, ...)] 

Done. Both debit cards permanently cancelled. Bluest replacement ordered... 

User: Great news—my Bluest Account replacement card just arrived . Can you help me activate it? 

Agent: [call: get debit cards by account id 7823(...)] [unlock: activate debit card 8292] 

I located your new Bluest replacement debit card (ending 7260)... 

User: Last 4 digits: 7260 , expiration: 11/29 , CVV: 741 . PIN: 5739 .

Agent: [call: activate debit card 8292(card id=“dbc 8eed7b16caeb”, last 4 digits=“7260”, expiration date=“11/29”, cvv=“741”, pin=“5739”)] 

Your Bluest replacement debit card is now activated and ready to use. 

# D. System Prompts and Policies 

In this section, we give the system prompts given to the agent LLM. These prompts vary slightly between retrieval configurations, to give the agent information about how to access the knowledge base. 

D.1. Dense/Sparse Retrieval Prompt 

Here we show the system prompt used for the sparse and dense retrieval configurations. Note that we provide the agent with the exact retrieval model used, so it can adjust its query generation strategy as desired. For example, an ideal query for BM25 lookups (focused on keywords) may be different than for a dense retrieval model. 

Agent System Prompt in Dense/Sparse Retrieval Configurations 

# Rho-Bank Customer Service Policy You are a helpful customer service agent for Rho-Bank. Your goal is to help customers by searching the knowledge base and providing accurate information. ## Guidelines 1. Do not make up policies, information, or actions that you can take on behalf of the user. All instructions will be found here or in the knowledge base. If you cannot find relevant information, let the user know. 2. Do not ask for any documentation, receipts... from the customer unless it states very clearly in the knowledge base how to process it, and whether you’re allowed to do so. 3. Be polite and professional 4. If you need the current time, always use the get_current_time() tool. Do not make up or assume the current time. 5. Generally, if the issue cannot be resolved or is outside your capabilities, ask the user whether they would like to be transferred to a human agent. If they do, invoke the appropriate transfer_to_human_agents tool. Do this only if you absolutely have to, and you are sure that there are no potential actions you can take as specified in the knowledge base, or in your policy. Do not transfer without asking the user first. This guidance may be overridden by specific scenario-based transfer guidance in the knowledge base. 6. If an issue falls within your capabilities and the user still wants to be transferred to a human agent, kindly inform the user that you can help them, and try to help them first. If the user asks for a human agent 4 times, then you may invoke the transfer_to_human_agents tool. This guidance may be overridden by specific scenario-based transfer guidance in the knowledge base. 7. Do not give intermediate responses to users while processing that would give away internal rho-bank information/policies. 

20 τ -Knowledge 

**Search the knowledge base** for relevant information when appropriate using the provided ‘KB_search‘ tool (uses [BM25/text-embedding-3-large/Qwen3-8B-embeddings] for retrieval). ## Additional Instructions ### Discoverable Tools #### Giving Discoverable Tools to Users The knowledge base may contain instructions that indicate certain actions should be performed by the user themselves rather than by you. These are called "user discoverable tools." A user discoverable tool is a tool that you provide to the user so they can execute it on their own (e.g., through a customer portal or app). **When to give user discoverable tools:** - Only give a tool when the user would like to perform an action, and the knowledge base explicitly has a tool that allows the user to perform this action (e.g., "to do X, have the user call tool_name(args)"). IMPORTANT: Do not unlock tools that you do not plan on giving to the user and actually using: this causes issues in database logging. - You must search the knowledge base to find tools that you can give. Do not invent or guess user discoverable tools - Only use tool names and arguments discovered in the knowledge base **How to give a tool:** - Use the ‘give_discoverable_user_tool(discoverable_tool_name)‘ function - Provide the exact tool name as specified in the knowledge base - Explain to the user what the tool does and how to use it, and what arguments to provide. Just explaining isn’t enough, you must use the ‘give_discoverable_user_tool(discoverable_tool_name)‘ function. #### Unlocking and Using Agent Discoverable Tools The knowledge base may contain references to specialized internal tools that you can unlock and use. These are called "agent discoverable tools." Unlike regular tools which are always available, these tools must be explicitly unlocked after discovering them in the knowledge base. **When to use agent discoverable tools:** - Only unlock a tool when the knowledge base explicitly mentions it (e.g., "use tool_name to perform X"), and do not unlock tools you do not plan to use. - You must search the knowledge base to find tools that you can unlock. Do not invent or guess tool names - only use tool names discovered in the knowledge base. **How to use agent discoverable tools:** 1. First, unlock the tool using ‘unlock_discoverable_agent_tool(agent_tool_name)‘ with the exact tool name from the knowledge base: you must unlock the tool before using it to get information on the proper params. IMPORTANT: Do not unlock tools that you do not plan on actually using: this causes issues in database logging. 2. Then, call the tool using ‘call_discoverable_agent_tool(agent_tool_name, arguments)‘ with the required arguments 3. The unlock step is required before calling - you cannot call a tool that hasn’t been unlocked ### Authenticating Users Generally, for any scenario involving accessing customer information in internal databases, you must first verify their identity before proceeding. No need to verify more than once in a single conversation. You should ONLY verify a user’s identity if you need to access or modify their customer information in internal databases on their behalf. Here are some concrete examples: * Looking up account balances, transaction history, referral history... * Changing account settings (e.g., address, phone number, email) 

21 τ -Knowledge 

* Closing an account * Adding or removing authorized users * Requesting information about specific transactions * Discussing specific loan or credit details * Filing a dispute on behalf of the user To verify the identity of the user, call the appropriate read tools, and ensure that they are able to give correctly any 2 out of the following values: date of birth, email, phone number, address. Knowing full name or userID is not enough to verify. After verification, you must call the verification logging tool to properly log the information into the verification records. Do not leak any information about the user before they are verified. 

D.2. Terminal-Use Setup and Prompt 

For our terminal-use configuration, we build on Anthropic’s sandbox-runtime 1, and give the agent a shell tool for executing generic shell commands. We use the following system prompt: 

Terminal-Use System Prompt 

# Rho-Bank Customer Service Policy [as above] ## Knowledge Base Access You have access to a knowledge base of documents stored as files on a filesystem. Use the ‘shell‘ tool to run standard Unix commands to explore and search these documents. ### The ‘shell‘ Tool The ‘shell‘ tool executes commands in the knowledge base directory. Use any standard Unix utilities: **File listing:** - ‘ls‘ - List all files - ‘ls -la‘ - Detailed listing with file sizes **Reading files:** - ‘cat <file>‘ - Display entire file contents - ‘head -n 20 <file>‘ - First 20 lines - ‘tail -n 20 <file>‘ - Last 20 lines **Searching:** - ‘grep -r "<pattern>" .‘ - Search all files for pattern - ‘grep -ri "<pattern>" .‘ - Case-insensitive search - ‘grep -rn "<pattern>" .‘ - Show line numbers - ‘grep -C 2 "<pattern>" <file>‘ - Show 2 lines of context **Finding files:** - ‘find . -name "*<pattern>*"‘ - Find files by name pattern **Other utilities:** - ‘wc -l <file>‘ - Count lines - ‘sort‘, ‘uniq‘, ‘awk‘, ‘sed‘ - Text processing ### Recommended Workflow 1. ‘ls‘ - See what files are available 

> 1

https://github.com/anthropic-experimental/sandbox-runtime 

22 τ -Knowledge                                                                   

> 2. ‘cat INDEX.md‘ -Read the document index (lists all documents with titles) 3. ‘grep -ri "<keyword>" .‘ -Search for relevant keywords 4. ‘cat <filename>‘ -Read full documents that match ### Important Notes -All documents are Markdown (.md) files in the current directory -INDEX.md contains asummary of all documents -File names are based on document IDs -Search thoroughly -information may span multiple documents ## Additional Instructions [as above]

# E. More Details on Metric Computation 

Throughout the paper and the remainder of this Appendix, we reference fine-grained metrics beyond pure pass ˆk scores to compare models and configurations on a deeper level. Here, we define and further explain how all metrics are computed. 

Document Recall Document Recall computes how much of the gold document content made it into the context window of the agent over the course of the task. For dense and sparse retrieval configurations, Document Recall is computed directly from the set of retrieved documents by measuring coverage of the gold document set. For the terminal-use configuration, where partial documents may be retrieved via shell commands, we instead measure Document Recall using the ROUGE metric (Lin, 2004), computed between the concatenated gold documents and the agent’s full conversation context. 

Action Recall Because pass ˆk scores are based on a binary pass/fail measure on tasks, we introduce Action Recall as a proxy for measuring how close the agent got to task success, even when the final database state did not align with the expected state. For Action Recall, we compute performance based on a simple proportion of expected actions that the agent and/or user successfully took. For example, if an agent is expected to apply for 3 credit cards but only applied for one, the Action Recall score will be 1/3. We note that this metric is not an ideal proxy for performance, as it does not consider actions that should not have been taken but were taken, and a single missed action may be a significant failure depending on task parameters. Nonetheless, we consider this metric an acceptable proxy to dive deeper into partial performance beyond just binary pass/fail scores. 

Computing statistical significance We assess statistical significance between models and retrieval configurations using paired bootstrap comparisons (Koehn, 2004) on either task pass rates (pass ˆ1) or Action Recall. For each comparison between two configurations, we first collect paired observations at the (model, task) level. For each pair, we compute the difference in the metric of interest (e.g., ∆ = score A − score B ), yielding a set of paired differences that control for both task difficulty and model-specific effects. We then compute the observed mean of these differences and estimate its sampling distribution via bootstrap resampling with replacement over the paired differences (1,000 iterations). Statistical significance is determined by computing a one-sided p-value as the fraction of bootstrap samples whose mean difference has the opposite sign of the observed effect. This paired procedure increases statistical power relative to unpaired tests by isolating the effect of the condition change while holding model and task fixed. 

# F. Retrieval Hyperparameter Study 

To ensure that the evaluated hyperparameters reflect a strong baseline on our benchmark, we conducted extensive hyper-parameter ablations. For both dense and sparse retrieval, we varied two factors: (1) whether retrieval results were filtered through a reranker, and (2) whether a separate grep tool (a simple regex-based search) was provided. Together, these choices define four retrieval configurations for each base retriever, spanning single-tool setups (retrieval only, or retrieval with reranking) and two-tool setups (retrieval with grep, with or without reranking). For the reranker, we used a pointwise LLM-based reranker, with the prompt used by (Long et al., 2025) and filtering out results scoring below 5.: 23 τ -Knowledge Reranker Prompt                                                                        

> You are given aquery and adocument. Adocument is relevant if it contains information that helps answer or address the query. Adocument is not relevant if it does not help answer the query, even if it mentions similar topics. Your task is to determine whether the document is relevant to the query. Rate the relevance on a scale from 0to 10, where: -0means completely irrelevant -10 means highly relevant and fully addresses the query Query: <query> Document: <document>

For the terminal-use configuration, we ablated a single parameter: whether the agent was permitted to execute write commands to take notes and reorganize the knowledge base. We report two primary metrics: pass ˆ1 and Action Recall (as defined in Appendix E). Statistical significance is assessed via paired bootstrap comparisons between configurations. The results are summarized below. 

Effect of adding a reranker We determined that adding a reranker does not yield statistically significant changes in pass ˆ1for any retriever. We see a small but statistically significant improvement in Action Recall in certain Qwen embedding model configurations. We therefore do not use a reranker in our main table evaluation to increase runtime efficiency and avoid additional confounders when computing task duration. Table 3 reports observed deltas and whether they are significant.                                     

> Table 3. Effect of adding a reranker within each retriever family, stratified by grep setting.
> Impact of adding reranker Retriever Configuration ∆pass ˆ1∆Action Recall text-embedding-3-large Grep +0 .013 (n.s.) +0 .026 (n.s.) text-embedding-3-large No grep +0 .016 (n.s.) +0 .015 (n.s.) Qwen3-embedding-8B Grep −0.016 (n.s.) −0.027 (n.s.) Qwen3-embedding-8B No grep +0 .011 (n.s.) +0 .055 (sig.)
> BM25 Grep +0 .010 (n.s.) +0 .023 (n.s.) BM25 No grep −0.010 (n.s.) −0.012 (n.s.)

Effect of including a grep tool We find that grep does not produce statistically significant changes in pass ˆ1 for any retriever. For Action Recall, grep shows a small but significant positive effect only for Qwen3-embedding-8B when a reranker is used; all other Action Recall differences are not significant. We therefore proceeded with configurations that did not include the grep tool alongside the dense/sparse retrievers. We additionally evaluated grep in isolation and found that it did not outperform dense or sparse retrieval tools. Full results are shown in Table 4.                                     

> Table 4. Effect of adding grep within each retriever family, stratified by reranker setting.
> Impact of adding grep Retriever Configuration ∆pass ˆ1∆Action Recall text-embedding-3-large No reranker +0 .054 (n.s.) +0 .035 (n.s.) text-embedding-3-large Reranker +0 .008 (n.s.) +0 .018 (n.s.) Qwen3-embedding-8b No reranker +0 .021 (n.s.) +0 .019 (n.s.) Qwen3-embedding-8b Reranker +0 .039 (n.s.) +0 .098 (sig.)
> BM25 No reranker 0.000 (n.s.) +0 .029 (n.s.) BM25 Reranker −0.021 (n.s.) −0.008 (n.s.)

24 τ -Knowledge 

Effect of number of retrieved documents We ran a pilot search over the number of documents initially retrieved by our dense/sparse retrieval step. Our objective was to determine how scaling this k value affects agent performance and latency, with the goal of selecting an intermediate value that balances these two opposing metrics. Our results are summarized in Table 5. Across configurations, we did not see statistically significant differences in performance between retrieving 20 and 10 documents at a time, while some configurations (BM25) exhibited slightly worse performance when retrieving 5 documents at a time. To reduce context length and overall experiment duration, we chose a median k value of 10 for our experiments.    

> Table 5. Impact of increasing retrieval set size k(reranker + no-grep). Deltas computed as (right – left).

Retriever Configuration ∆ pass ˆ1 ∆ Action Recall 

text-emb-3-large k=10 vs k=5 -0.010 (n.s.) +0.013 (n.s.) k=20 vs k=10 0.000 (n.s.) +0.063 (n.s.) Qwen3-emb-8b k=10 vs k=5 -0.100 (n.s.) +0.043 (n.s.) k=20 vs k=10 -0.030 (n.s.) +0.109 (n.s.) BM25 k=10 vs k=5 +0.019 (n.s.) +0.048 (n.s.) k=20 vs k=10 +0.041 (n.s.) +0.030 (n.s.) 

Effect of including write tools in terminal use configuration The read-only terminal-use setting versus allowing write commands showed no significant differences in either pass ˆ1 or Action Recall in the head-to-head test ( ∆pass ˆ1=-0.052, ∆

Action Recall=-0.052). Qualitatively, on three frontier models (GPT-5.2 (high), Gemini-3-Pro, Claude-4.5-Opus), we did not see the model use writing commands in any significant way, even when prompting to explicitly do so. GPT-5.2 did not use any write commands at all on any tasks. Gemini-3-Pro and Claude-4.5-Opus occasionally wrote notes files with rough summaries of information they had gathered, but never referenced these files. We believe there is significant promise in future work to get agents to better utilize the terminal as knowledge management. 

# G. Full Results for Tested Configurations 

In this section, we present the full results and analyses from our main experiments described in the paper. Table 6 shows the full results from our two additional ablations, where the agent is given either no access to the knowledge base, or given the entire knowledge base in its context window. Tables 7, 8, and 9 present pairwise significance tests using paired bootstrap, comparing retrieval configurations and agent models on pass ˆ1 or Action Recall. Each cell shows the p-value for whether the row outperforms the column. Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance at p < 0.05 for the row outperforming the column. Table 10 and 11 show full pass ˆk, document recall, cost, and latency results. Table 13 presents the average number of knowledge tool calls per task by model and configuration.  

> Table 6. Model performance in additional configurations. No knowledge means the agent does not have access to information in the unstructured knowledge base at all; Long Context means the entire knowledge base is put in the system prompt (not applicable to Opus due to an insufficient context window size).

No Knowledge Long Context Model pass ˆ1 (%) pass ˆ2 (%) pass ˆ1 (%) pass ˆ2 (%) 

Claude-4.5-Opus (high) 2.32 1.55 – –GPT-5.2 (high) 1.03 0.20 11.86 2.23 Gemini-3-flash (high) 1.29 0.34 8.76 2.06 Gemini-3-pro (high) 0.77 0.17 11.08 2.58 25 τ -Knowledge        

> Table 7. Pairwise significance for retrieval configurations (pass ˆ1, paired bootstrap). Each cell shows the p-value for whether the row outperforms the column. Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance at p < 0.05 for the row outperforming the column

Gold Terminal Qwen3-emb-8b BM25 text-emb-3-large 

Gold — <.001* <.001* <.001* <.001* Terminal <.001 — 0.005* 0.013* 0.001* Qwen3-emb-8b <.001 0.005 — 0.480 0.072 BM25 <.001 0.013 0.480 — 0.128 text-emb-3-large <.001 <0.001 0.072 0.128 —       

> Table 8. Pairwise significance for retrieval configurations (action recall, paired bootstrap). Each cell shows the p-value for whether the row outperforms the column. Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance at p < 0.05 for the row outperforming the column

Gold Terminal Qwen3-emb-8b BM25 text-emb-3-large 

Gold — <.001* <.001* <.001* <.001* Terminal <.001 — 0.007* <.001* <.001* Qwen3-emb-8b <.001 0.001 — 0.474 0.002 BM25 <.001 <.001 0.474 — 0.014 text-emb-3-large <.001 <.001 0.002 0.014 —       

> Table 9. Pairwise significance for models (pass ˆ1, paired bootstrap). Each cell shows the p-value for whether the row outperforms the column. Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance at p < 0.05 for the row outperforming the column
> GPT-5.2 (high)
> Opus (high)
> Gemini-Flash (high)
> Sonnet (high)
> Gemini-Pro (high)
> GPT-5.2 (none)

GPT-5.2 (high) — 0.072 0.004* 0.001* <.001* <.001* Opus (high) 0.072 — 0.148 0.014* <.001* <.001* Gemini-Flash (high) 0.004 0.148 — 0.274 <.001* <.001* Sonnet (high) 0.001 0.014 0.274 — <.001* <.001* Gemini-Pro (high) <.001 <.001 <.001 <.001 — <.001* GPT-5.2 (none) <.001 <.001 <.001 <.001 <.001 —26 τ -Knowledge 

Table 10. Task success results (pass ˆk and document recall) for all model and retrieval configuration combinations. Doc. recall is the document recall, computed as coverage of gold documents in the context window (see Appendix E). Retrieval configurations: text-emb-3-large = dense retrieval with OpenAI text-embedding-3-large embeddings; Qwen3-emb-8b = dense retrieval with Qwen3-embedding-8b embeddings; BM25 = sparse lexical retrieval; Terminal = terminal use; Gold = required (ground-truth) documents in context. Bolded 

values represent 1) best configuration overall and 2) the best non-gold configuration for each column. 

Model Reasoning Retrieval Config pass ˆ1 pass ˆ2 pass ˆ3 pass ˆ4 Doc. Recall 

Claude-4.5-Opus High Terminal 24.74 14.95 11.34 9.28 62.38 

Claude-4.5-Opus High BM25 17.78 10.65 7.73 6.19 59.04 Claude-4.5-Opus High text-emb-3-large 18.30 10.82 7.47 6.19 57.07 Claude-4.5-Opus High Qwen3-emb-8b 19.59 12.03 9.54 8.25 58.28 Claude-4.5-Opus High Gold 39.69 31.62 28.35 26.80 N/A Claude-4.5-Sonnet High Terminal 22.42 14.09 11.86 10.31 59.66 Claude-4.5-Sonnet High BM25 16.75 8.08 4.64 3.09 54.82 Claude-4.5-Sonnet High text-emb-3-large 17.53 9.97 6.96 5.15 54.99 Claude-4.5-Sonnet High Qwen3-emb-8b 17.78 10.48 8.25 7.22 56.44 Claude-4.5-Sonnet High Gold 33.76 25.09 21.13 19.59 N/A GPT-5.2 High Terminal 25.52 16.84 11.86 9.28 45.53 GPT-5.2 High BM25 24.48 16.49 12.63 10.31 44.39 GPT-5.2 High text-emb-3-large 23.45 15.98 13.14 11.34 43.42 GPT-5.2 High Qwen3-emb-8b 24.74 17.01 14.43 13.40 44.60 GPT-5.2 High Gold 32.73 24.23 20.36 18.56 N/A GPT-5.2 None Terminal 11.60 6.01 3.61 2.06 29.08 GPT-5.2 None BM25 9.54 5.33 3.61 3.09 30.47 GPT-5.2 None text-emb-3-large 8.25 5.33 4.38 4.12 28.19 GPT-5.2 None Qwen3-emb-8b 12.37 7.22 5.15 4.12 30.77 GPT-5.2 None Gold 15.72 9.45 7.22 6.19 N/A Gemini-3-Flash High Terminal 20.62 10.31 6.44 4.12 61.88 Gemini-3-Flash High BM25 18.56 10.14 7.22 6.19 50.53 Gemini-3-Flash High text-emb-3-large 18.56 10.31 6.96 5.15 52.54 Gemini-3-Flash High Qwen3-emb-8b 18.56 10.31 6.44 4.12 55.19 Gemini-3-Flash High Gold 36.34 27.32 22.68 19.59 N/A Gemini-3-Pro High Terminal 15.72 8.08 5.41 4.12 53.59 Gemini-3-Pro High BM25 13.66 8.08 6.44 5.15 52.34 Gemini-3-Pro High text-emb-3-large 12.89 7.04 4.64 3.09 49.56 Gemini-3-Pro High Qwen3-emb-8b 12.89 6.87 4.64 3.09 49.93 Gemini-3-Pro High Gold 33.25 21.48 16.24 13.40 N/A 

27 τ -Knowledge 

Table 11. Efficiency results for all model and retrieval configuration combinations. Cost is average dollars per task of all agent input/output tokens. Duration (Dur.) is the total wall-clock time from start of task to end. Median turn time (Med. Turn) is the median wall-clock time for a single agent turn (from user message to final agent response before the next user message). Bolded values represent 1) best configuration overall and 2) the best non-gold configuration for each column. 

Model Reasoning Retrieval Config $/Task Dur. (s) Med. Turn (s) 

Claude-4.5-Opus High Terminal 4.36 177.1 21.1 Claude-4.5-Opus High BM25 4.20 160.3 19.3 Claude-4.5-Opus High text-emb-3-large 3.42 159.2 19.2 Claude-4.5-Opus High Qwen3-emb-8b 4.19 178.5 19.8 Claude-4.5-Opus High Gold 1.05 132.2 15.8 Claude-4.5-Sonnet High Terminal 4.05 223.7 24.9 Claude-4.5-Sonnet High BM25 2.84 166.4 21.0 Claude-4.5-Sonnet High text-emb-3-large 2.40 166.2 21.1 Claude-4.5-Sonnet High Qwen3-emb-8b 2.46 179.2 20.6 Claude-4.5-Sonnet High Gold 0.67 130.2 16.6 GPT-5.2 High Terminal 2.15 1567.8 187.3 GPT-5.2 High BM25 2.15 986.4 87.6 GPT-5.2 High text-emb-3-large 1.00 1131.8 112.2 GPT-5.2 High Qwen3-emb-8b 1.01 1332.6 133.0 GPT-5.2 High Gold 0.24 1155.1 103.4 GPT-5.2 None Terminal 0.64 516.1 62.5 GPT-5.2 None BM25 0.32 390.3 39.2 GPT-5.2 None text-emb-3-large 0.27 374.4 38.8 GPT-5.2 None Qwen3-emb-8b 0.34 406.2 39.7 GPT-5.2 None Gold 0.12 288.1 31.0 Gemini-3-Flash High Terminal 0.38 317.4 28.4 Gemini-3-Flash High BM25 0.37 162.4 15.1 Gemini-3-Flash High text-emb-3-large 0.29 152.3 14.9 Gemini-3-Flash High Qwen3-emb-8b 0.32 160.8 14.0 

Gemini-3-Flash High Gold 0.08 139.6 10.6 

Gemini-3-Pro High Terminal 1.23 363.2 36.5 Gemini-3-Pro High BM25 0.56 237.8 25.7 Gemini-3-Pro High text-emb-3-large 0.54 300.9 32.0 Gemini-3-Pro High Qwen3-emb-8b 0.60 373.0 40.4 Gemini-3-Pro High Gold 0.25 228.1 25.0 

Table 12. pass ˆ1 scores for older GPT models. Columns indicate retrieval configurations: text-embedding-3-large and Qwen-Emb use dense retrieval with the respective embedding models; BM25 represents sparse lexical retrieval; Terminal provides shell access to the knowledge base as files; Gold places ground-truth documents directly in context, removing retrieval from the evaluation. Parenthetical values indicate the difference from the Gold setting for the row. 

Embeddings Model Gold text-emb-3-large Qwen-Emb BM25 Terminal GPT-4.1 20.6 10.1 (-10.5) 9.5 (-11.1) 9.3 (-11.3) 9.8 (-10.8) GPT-4o 15.7 7.2 (-8.5) 8.2 (-7.5) 9.0 (-6.7) 5.2 (-10.5) 28 τ -Knowledge    

> Table 13. Average knowledge tool calls per task by condition and model. The top section shows the number of specific shell commands each agent made in the terminal use condition. The bottom section shows the number of KB_search tool calls made in each sparse/dense retrieval configuration.

Terminal Use (Shell Commands) Model grep cat sed ls Other 

Claude-4.5-Opus (high) 10.85 9.74 0.00 0.34 0.20 Claude-4.5-Sonnet (high) 12.55 13.54 0.00 1.58 0.46 GPT-5.2 (high) 29.38 11.65 6.07 1.49 0.54 GPT-5.2 (none) 6.68 6.73 0.11 1.27 0.10 Gemini-3-Flash (high) 22.51 12.66 0.01 1.71 0.16 Gemini-3-Pro (high) 15.24 5.86 0.00 1.04 0.11 

Dense/Sparse Retrieval (KB search) Model text-emb-3-large Qwen3-emb-8b BM25 

Claude-4.5-Opus (high) 8.40 8.70 9.06 Claude-4.5-Sonnet (high) 9.18 8.96 9.62 GPT-5.2 (high) 18.06 17.31 19.98 GPT-5.2 (none) 4.32 3.97 3.98 Gemini-3-Flash (high) 13.96 14.31 17.47 Gemini-3-Pro (high) 7.24 6.87 7.97 29