Title: Building AI Coding Agents for the Terminal: Scaffolding, Harness, Context Engineering, and Lessons Learned

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.05344v1

Published Time: Fri, 06 Mar 2026 02:26:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 81

Markdown Content:
# Building AI Coding Agents for the Terminal: Scaffolding, Harness, Context Engineering, and Lessons Learned 

Nghi D. Q. Bui 

OpenDev 

§ https://github.com/opendev-to/opendev 

# bdqnghi@gmail.com 

## Abstract 

The landscape of AI coding assistance is undergoing a fundamental shift from complex IDE plugins to versatile, terminal-native agents. Operating directly where developers manage source control, execute builds, and deploy environments, CLI-based agents offer unprecedented autonomy for long-horizon development tasks. In this paper, we present O PEN DEV , an open-source, command-line coding agent engineered specif-ically for this new paradigm. Effective autonomous assistance requires strict safety controls and highly efficient context management to prevent context bloat and reasoning degradation. O PEN DEV overcomes these challenges through a compound AI system architecture [ 100 ] with workload-specialized model routing, a dual-agent architecture separating planning from execution, lazy tool discovery, and adaptive context compaction that progressively reduces older observations. Furthermore, it employs an automated mem-ory system to accumulate project-specific knowledge across sessions and counteracts instruction fade-out through event-driven system reminders. By enforcing explicit reasoning phases and prioritizing context efficiency, O PEN DEV provides a secure, extensible foundation for terminal-first AI assistance, offering a blueprint for robust autonomous software engineering. 

## 1 Introduction 

Figure 1: Overview of O PEN DEV . Work is organized into concurrent sessions, each composed of multiple specialized sub-agents; each agent executes typed workflows (Execution, Thinking, Compaction) that independently bind to a user-configured LLM. This four-level hierarchy (session → agent → workflow →

LLM) enables fine-grained model selection, allowing cost, latency, and capability trade-offs to be optimized per workflow. 

> arXiv:2603.05344v1 [cs.AI] 5 Mar 2026

The rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs) has catalyzed a new paradigm in software development: AI-powered coding assistants that operate as autonomous agents [ 92 , 96 , 102 ]. Unlike traditional code completion tools that suggest inline snippets, agentic coding assistants can reason about complex tasks, execute multi-step plans, and interact with the development environment through tool use. Comprehensive surveys have documented the explosive growth of code intelligence research [ 43 , 44 ], and roadmaps for Agentic Software Engineering [ 1] have formalized the methodological principles governing human–AI collaboration. Systems such as SWE-Agent [ 92 ], OpenHands [ 81 ], and HyperAgent [ 66 ] have demonstrated the potential of autonomous agents on standardized benchmarks. The commercial impact has been equally dramatic, with GitHub Copilot surpassing 15 million developers [ 29 ], rapid revenue growth for AI-native editors [ 5], and major labs launching autonomous coding agents [ 18 , 62 ], signaling that agentic coding has moved from research prototype to industrial deployment. 

The rise of terminal-native agents. For the past few years, AI coding assistants have been tightly integrated into IDEs, acting as reactive copilots requiring constant human oversight. Recently, a major shift has begun, moving away from complex IDE plugins toward simpler command-line interfaces. Claude Code [ 3]led this shift, demonstrating that a terminal-native agent could match or exceed IDE-integrated tools in real-world software engineering tasks. The terminal is the operational heart of software development, natively supporting source control, build systems, remote SSH sessions, and headless server environments. Early systems such as Aider [ 27 ], CodeAct [ 80 ], and Open Interpreter [ 60 ] demonstrated the viability of terminal-based AI pair programming and executable code actions. Today, every major AI lab offers a CLI agent [ 3, 30 , 62 ], alongside open-source alternatives such as Goose [ 10 ], OpenCode [ 19 ], and Crush [ 13 ]. However, realizing this potential is non-trivial. Benchmarks such as Terminal-Bench [ 54 ] and LongCLI-Bench [ 25 ] demonstrate that even frontier models struggle with continuous terminal operation, underscoring the need for purpose-built engineering solutions. These benchmark results point to three fundamental engineering challenges that any long-running terminal agent must solve: managing finite context windows over sessions that routinely exceed the model’s token budget, preventing destructive operations when the agent can execute arbitrary shell commands, and extending capabilities without overwhelming the agent’s prompt budget. We organize the architectural response around two phases: scaffolding , which assembles the agent (system prompt, tool schemas, subagent registry) before the first prompt, and the harness , which orchestrates tool dispatch, context management, and safety enforcement at runtime [ 99 ] (Section 2.2). Yet the design space for terminal-native agentic tools remains largely underexplored: most production systems are closed-source with undocumented architectural decisions, and existing open-source frameworks either target benchmarks rather than interactive use or lack published technical reports [ 36 , 53 ]. Three critical open questions motivate this work: How should multi-model architectures balance cost, latency, and capability across different cognitive tasks? What safety mechanisms prevent destructive operations without hampering developer productivity? And how can systems sustain long-running conversations within finite context limits? In this paper, we present O PEN DEV , an open AI-powered command-line agent for software engineering. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive technical report for an open-source, terminal-native, interactive coding agent. Existing systems occupy one of two categories: benchmark-oriented frameworks such as SWE-Agent [ 92 ] have published research papers but are primarily designed for automated evaluation rather than interactive daily use; OpenHands [ 81 ] is both production-grade and well-documented but operates through a browser-based UI rather than a terminal interface; CLI-native agents such as Aider [ 27 ], Goose [ 10 ], OpenCode [ 19 ], Crush [ 13 ], and Gemini CLI [ 30 ] lack published technical reports documenting their design decisions; and Claude Code [ 3 ] is CLI-native but neither open-source nor accompanied by a published technical report. The purpose of this paper is not to present a novel algorithmic breakthrough, but rather to share the design decisions, trade-offs, and lessons learned from engineering a production-ready, agentic coding system that bridges the gap between closed-source industrial practice and open academic discourse. 

A central design principle of O PEN DEV is that it is a compound AI system [ 100 ]: not a single monolithic LLM, but a structured ensemble of agents and workflows, each independently bound to a user-configured 2LLM (Section 2.2.5). This framing, articulated by Zaharia et al., argues that state-of-the-art AI results are increasingly achieved by systems that compose multiple models, retrievers, and tools rather than relying on a single model call. OPEN DEV operationalizes this principle: its decoupled architecture makes the system model-agnostic by construction, and techniques like learned model routing [ 59 ] can be applied at the workflow level. Switching providers or optimizing cost requires only a configuration change, not a code change. The system’s capabilities are therefore not fixed at deployment but continuously upgradeable as better models emerge. 

Design principles and contributions. The design of O PEN DEV is guided by three overarching principles. First, separation of concerns : each architectural decision (model selection, context management, safety enforce-ment, tool dispatch) should be independently configurable and replaceable without affecting the others. Second, progressive degradation : the system should function gracefully as resources are exhausted, whether that means token budget, iteration count, or network connectivity. Third, transparency over magic : every system action (tool calls, safety vetoes, context compaction, memory updates) should be observable and overridable by the developer. These principles manifest in five concrete contributions: 1. Per-workflow LLM configurability via a compound architecture. Different execution phases impose different demands on model capability, latency, and cost. We present a per-workflow LLM binding archi-tecture where each cognitive workflow independently selects a model via user configuration (Section 2.2.5), informed by the compound AI systems perspective [100] and model routing research [59]. 2. Extended ReAct execution pipeline. We extend the standard ReAct cycle [ 96 ] with explicit thinking and optional self-critique phases that separate deliberation from action (hereafter, the ReAct loop ; Section 2.2.6), and integrate staged context compaction directly into the reasoning loop, drawing on insights from context engineering research [36, 53]. 3. Behavioral steering over long horizons. We present event-driven system reminders that counteract instruction fade-out in long-running sessions by injecting targeted guidance at the point of decision rather than relying solely on the initial system prompt (Section 2.3.4). A conditional prompt composition pipeline assembles agent instructions from independent, priority-ordered sections that load only when contextually relevant, reducing prompt overhead while preserving comprehensive guidance (Section 2.3.1). 4. Token-efficient extensibility and defense-in-depth safety. We present a registry-based tool architecture with lazy-discovered external tools via MCP [ 2 ] (Section 2.4.7) and a five-layer safety architecture that enforces constraints at progressively lower levels of abstraction: prompt-level guardrails, schema-level tool gating through dual-agent separation (Section 2.2), a runtime approval system with persistent permissions, tool-level validation, and user-defined lifecycle hooks (Section 2.1). 5. Context engineering as a first-class concern. We treat context management as a first-class engineering concern [ 4, 53 ], presenting Adaptive Context Compaction (Section 2.3.6), event-driven system reminders to counteract attention decay (Section 2.3.4), and an experience-driven memory pipeline [ 63 , 103 ] that accumu-lates project-specific knowledge. Our compaction and memory strategies align with the entropy-reduction and minimal-sufficiency principles identified in recent theoretical work on context engineering [36, 98]. 

Paper organization. The remainder of this paper follows the path from construction to reflection to context. Section 2 details what was built: the four-layer system architecture spanning agent reasoning, context engineering, tooling, and persistence. Section 3 examines what was learned: five cross-cutting design tensions that emerged during iterative development and the transferable lessons they yield. Section 4 positions these decisions within the broader research landscape, and Section 5 identifies future directions. The appendix provides reference-level catalogs of tools, prompts, configuration schemas, and implementation constants. 3Figure 2: System architecture of O PEN DEV , organized into four layers: Entry & UI, Agent, Tool & Context, and Persistence. Arrows indicate primary data-flow directions. 

## 2 System Architecture 

2.1 Overview 

Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of O PEN DEV across four principal layers: Entry & UI, Agent, Tool & Context, and Persistence. A user query flows through this pipeline sequentially, from the entry point through agent reasoning and tool execution, before results are persisted and rendered. 

Entry & UI Layer. The CLI Entry Point parses arguments and bootstraps four shared managers (Config-Manager, SessionManager, ModeManager, and ApprovalManager), which are injected into all downstream components. O PEN DEV supports two frontends: a TUI built on Textual using blocking modal approvals, and a Web UI backed by FastAPI and WebSockets using asynchronous polling approvals. Both implement a shared UICallback contract, keeping the agent layer UI-agnostic. 

Agent Layer. OPEN DEV assigns five specialized model roles to distinct LLMs (Section 2.2.5), each lazily initialized and informed by a locally cached capability registry. The system operates in two modes: Normal Mode with full read-write tool access for execution, and Plan Mode restricted to read-only tools for safe planning (Section 2.2). Reasoning proceeds through the Extended ReAct Loop (Section 2.2.6), which runs four phases per turn: automatic context compaction when the token budget nears exhaustion; an optional thinking phase for pre-action reasoning at configurable depth; an optional self-critique phase; and the standard Reason-Act-Execute-Observe action phase. 

Tool & Context Layers. The Tool Execution Layer is built around a ToolRegistry that dispatches calls to typed handlers covering file operations, process execution, and web access, with support for batch parallel execution and on-demand MCP tool discovery (Section 2.4.7). A Skills system lazily injects reusable, domain-specific prompt templates from a three-tier hierarchy (built-in, project, user). The Context Engineering Layer manages the LLM context window through four subsystems: System Reminders (Section 2.3.4) for context-aware behavioral guidance, Prompt Composer for modular system-prompt assembly, Memory for cross-session continuity, and Compaction (Section 2.3.6) for reclaiming token budget. 4Persistence Layer. OPEN DEV persists state across four stores: a Config Manager that resolves settings through a project-local, user-global, environment-variable, and built-in default hierarchy; a Session Manager 

that saves full conversation histories as JSON; a Provider Cache that stores model capability metadata locally; and an operation log that tracks file changes for rollback. 

Safety Architecture. Because the agent can execute arbitrary shell commands, overwrite files, and spawn persistent processes, a single safety mechanism is insufficient. O PEN DEV therefore employs a defense-in-depth architecture with five independent safety layers (Figure 3), each designed to prevent a class of harm independently so that no single point of failure compromises the system.        

> Layer 1: Prompt-Level Guardrails (Section 2.3.1) Security policy, action safety, read-before-edit, git workflow, error recovery
> Layer 2: Schema-Level Tool Restrictions (Section 2.4.1) Plan-mode whitelist, per-subagent allowed_tools , MCP discovery gating
> Layer 3: Runtime Approval System (Section 2.4.1) Manual / Semi-Auto / Auto levels, pattern/command/prefix/danger rules, persistent permissions
> Layer 4: Tool-Level Validation (Section 2.4.3, Section 2.4.2)
> DANGEROUS_PATTERNS blocklist, stale-read detection, output truncation, timeouts
> Layer 5: Lifecycle Hooks (Section 2.4.1) Pre-tool blocking (exit code 2), argument mutation, JSON stdin protocol

Figure 3: Defense-in-depth safety architecture. Five independent layers intercept dangerous actions at progressively lower levels of abstraction, from model reasoning (Layer 1) to user-defined scripts (Layer 5). Each layer operates independently; failure of any single layer does not compromise the remaining four. Having established the four-layer overview, we now examine each layer in detail, beginning with the agent core that implements the reasoning loop driving all agent behavior. 

2.2 Agent Core Layer 

The agent layer sits between the UI and the tool execution layers (Figure 2). At its center is a single entry point, MainAgent , which receives every user prompt and decides how to process it. Understanding this layer requires two perspectives: how agents are assembled before the first prompt arrives (scaffolding), and how the assembled agent processes user messages at runtime (the harness). In this context, a harness is the runtime orchestration layer that wraps the core reasoning loop and coordinates tool execution, context management, safety enforcement, and session persistence around it [ 99 ]. Where scaffolding is concerned with constructing the agent before the first prompt, the harness is concerned with everything that happens after: dispatching tools, compacting context, enforcing safety invariants, and persisting state across turns. The subsections below present these two phases in order, then detail each supporting component individually. 

2.2.1 Agent Scaffolding 

Before the agent can process user prompts, it must be fully assembled. Every agent in O PEN DEV is constructed (system prompt compiled, tool schemas built, subagents registered) before the conversation lifecycle begins (Section 2.2.3). Understanding this construction pipeline clarifies why the runtime can treat all agents uniformly regardless of their role. 

Type foundation: BaseAgent and AgentInterface. All agents inherit from BaseAgent , an abstract base class that accepts three constructor arguments ( config , tool_registry , mode_manager ) and defines four ab-stract methods: build_system_prompt() assembles the system prompt string, build_tool_schemas() returns OpenAI-format tool schemas, call_llm() executes a single LLM call, and run_sync() runs a full ReAct loop. The critical design choice is eager construction : BaseAgent.__init__() calls both build_system_prompt() and 5build_tool_schemas() before the constructor returns. By the time __init__() completes, the agent is fully ready to serve requests, with no lazy prompt assembly, no first-call latency. A concrete refresh_tools() 

method re-invokes both build methods when the tool registry changes (e.g., after MCP server discovery or dynamic skill loading). Downstream code depends not on BaseAgent directly but on AgentInterface ,a @runtime_checkable Protocol requiring the same surface ( system_prompt , tool_schemas , refresh_tools ,

call_llm , run_sync ), which decouples the factory from the concrete agent class. 

Single concrete agent class. There is no class hierarchy of agent types. MainAgent is the only concrete subclass of BaseAgent , and every agent in the system (the main agent, all builtin subagents, and any user-defined custom agents) is an instance of this single class. Behavioral variation comes entirely from construction parameters: allowed_tools (a list that filters which tool schemas appear in the agent’s schema, or None for full access), _subagent_system_prompt (an override prompt set after construction), and an 

is_subagent flag derived from whether allowed_tools is non-null. Within __init__ , MainAgent sets four HTTP client slots to None for lazy initialization, one each for the normal, thinking, critique, and VLM providers, deferring API key validation until the first LLM call. It creates a ToolSchemaBuilder(registry, allowed_tools) for schema generation and a bounded Queue(maxsize=10) for thread-safe message injection from the Web UI. The lazy client slots correspond to the model roles described in Section 2.2.5: each slot materializes a provider-specific HTTP client on first access, allowing agents to be constructed before credentials are configured. 

Factory assembly. AgentFactory is the single entry point for agent construction. Both the TUI and Web UI invoke the same create_agents() method, ensuring identical setup regardless of frontend. The factory executes three phases in strict order: 

Phase 1 (Skills). The factory discovers skill definitions from three directories (builtin (swecli/skills/builtin/ ), user global (~/.opendev/skills/ ), and project-local (.opendev/skills/ )), creates a SkillLoader , and registers it with the tool registry so that the use_skill tool becomes available. 

Phase 2 (Subagents). The factory creates a SubAgentManager , calls register_defaults() to compile the builtin subagent specifications, then calls _register_custom_agents() to load any user-defined agents from con-figuration files. Finally, it registers the manager with the tool registry via set_subagent_manager() , which makes the spawn_subagent tool available. 

Phase 3 (Main agent). The factory constructs a MainAgent with no tool filtering (full access to all registered tools, including those added in Phases 1 and 2). The ordering constraint is essential: Phase 2 must complete before Phase 3 because the spawn_subagent tool description is dynamically built from the set of registered agents, and it must be present in the main agent’s schema. The factory returns an AgentSuite dataclass bundling the main agent, the SubAgentManager , and the SkillLoader .

Subagent compilation. Each subagent begins as a SubAgentSpec , a TypedDict containing a name, de-scription, system prompt, optional tool allowlist, optional model override, and optional Docker configu-ration. When SubAgentManager.register_subagent(spec) is called, it executes a four-step pipeline: (1) re-solve the tool list, defaulting to a hardcoded set of safe tools if none is specified; (2) create an AppConfig 

copy with the model override if one is provided; (3) construct a MainAgent with allowed_tools set to the resolved list, triggering the eager build of a filtered system prompt and tool schema; and (4) set 

agent._subagent_system_prompt to the spec’s prompt override. The result is stored as a CompiledSubAgent 

(name, description, agent instance, tool list). Construction is cheap because all subagents share the same tool registry reference, with no cloning or deep copying. Runtime isolation comes from two mechanisms: schema filtering at build time (the subagent never sees tools outside its allowlist) and message_history=None 

at execution time (each invocation starts with a fresh context, as detailed in Section 2.2.7). 

Dependency injection. Agent construction produces agents; runtime execution requires services .

AgentDependencies is a Pydantic model carrying seven fields that tools need at execution time: mode_manager ,6approval_manager , undo_manager , session_manager , working_dir , console , and config . The REPL or Web UI constructs this object with all managers and passes it to agent.run_sync() . Inside the ReAct loop (Section 2.2.6), individual managers are unpacked from the dependencies object and passed as key-word arguments to execute_tool() , keeping the tool registry interface flat: it does not depend on the 

AgentDependencies model directly. Subagents receive a lightweight SubAgentDeps dataclass with only three fields: mode_manager , approval_manager , and undo_manager . The omitted fields enforce an isolation bound-ary: subagents do not get session_manager (their messages are not persisted), console (output flows through 

ui_callback ), or config (each subagent carries its own configuration from construction). 

Design evolution. Three design pivots shaped the current scaffolding architecture. First, an early class hierarchy, with separate classes for planning agents, code-exploration agents, and web-generation agents, was replaced by the single parameterized MainAgent . The hierarchy created a diamond problem when subagents needed mixed capabilities (e.g., a web generator that also plans), and the parameterized approach eliminated it entirely. Second, lazy prompt building (constructing the system prompt on the first run_sync 

call) was replaced by the eager-build pattern. The lazy approach introduced first-call latency visible to the user and caused race conditions with MCP server discovery: tools registered after the first call would not appear in the prompt until a manual refresh. Eager building guarantees that every agent is complete at construction time. Third, inline subagent definitions, where hardcoded agent construction within the main agent’s code, were replaced by the SubAgentSpec registration system. This refactoring enabled custom agents defined in configuration files to go through the same compilation path as builtin agents, unifying the two code paths. 

2.2.2 Agent Runtime Architecture 

With scaffolding complete, the assembled agent is ready to process user messages. The runtime behavior is governed by the agent harness, the orchestration infrastructure introduced in Section 2.2 that turns a stateless LLM into a persistent, tool-using, self-correcting agent. Figure 4 maps this harness architecture: the ReAct execution loop at the center, surrounded by the subsystems that feed it, constrain it, and persist its work. 

The central execution cycle. The ReAct loop at the center of Figure 4 executes six phases per iteration: pre-check and compaction, thinking, self-critique, action, tool execution, and post-processing. Each phase is a distinct stage in the executor pipeline: pre-check drains injected messages and compacts under memory pressure, thinking and self-critique produce optional chain-of-thought traces, the action phase calls the LLM with full tool schemas, tool execution dispatches calls through the registry with approval checks, and post-processing decides whether to iterate or return. The cycle repeats until the agent produces a final text response with no tool calls, or until a safety cap is reached. Section 2.2.6 details the per-phase algorithms and control flow. 

Input and output boundaries. At the top of Figure 4, the Input Layer accepts user messages through a thread-safe bounded queue, allowing follow-up messages to arrive while the agent is mid-execution. Configuration and settings flow in alongside the message queue, providing the agent with its runtime parameters (model selection, approval level, working directory). At the bottom, the Post-Processing path handles three responsibilities after the loop terminates: persisting the updated conversation to the session store, executing any registered Stop hooks, and returning the agent’s final response to the UI layer for rendering. 

Supporting subsystems. The periphery of Figure 4 shows seven subsystems, each addressing a distinct concern and detailed in a dedicated section. The Prompt Composition engine (Section 2.3.1) assembles the system prompt from modular sections (identity, safety policy, tool guidance, workflow rules, and dynamic context), split into cacheable and non-cacheable segments for efficient API caching. The Tool Registry (Section 2.4.1) dispatches each tool call to specialized handlers, with MCP tools discovered lazily at runtime. The Safety System (Section 2.1) provides defense in depth through multiple independent layers, where no single layer is relied upon exclusively and each catches a different failure mode. Context Engineering 7Figure 4: The agent harness architecture: a detailed view of the Agent layer from Figure 2. The central ReAct loop (six phases: pre-check and compaction, thinking, self-critique, action, tool execution, post-processing) is surrounded by seven supporting subsystems. User messages enter through a message injection queue (top). The Prompt Composition engine assembles modular sections by priority into the system prompt. The Tool Registry dispatches to specialized handlers, with MCP tools discovered lazily. The Safety System enforces multiple independent layers (approval, dangerous command detection, hooks, stale-read detection, plan mode restrictions, doom loop detection, iteration cap, cooperative cancellation). Context Engineering applies five-stage progressive compaction as the conversation grows. Memory and Session services provide persistent strategy memory (playbook), session storage, and per-step undo via git snapshots. Subagent Orchestration spawns isolated agent instances with filtered tool access for parallel exploration or specialized tasks. (Section 2.3.6) manages the conversation as a finite resource, applying progressively aggressive compaction as token usage grows. Memory and Session services (Section 2.5) persist both the conversation transcript and a playbook of learned strategies that evolve based on feedback. Subagent Orchestration (Section 2.2.7) enables the main agent to delegate specialized tasks (code exploration, security review, web generation) to isolated agent instances that share the same tool infrastructure but operate with filtered tool access and independent conversation histories. The key architectural decision is that the system operates in two distinct modes, Plan Mode and Normal Mode ,with the agent transitioning between them based on user commands or prompt triggers. Figure 5 illustrates this dual-mode flow. 

Routing: plan or execute. When a user prompt arrives, the MainAgent checks whether it should enter Plan Mode or proceed directly in Normal Mode. Two triggers activate Plan Mode: an explicit /plan command from the user, or a heuristic that detects planning intent in the prompt (e.g., requests to “design,” “architect,” or “plan” a change). All other prompts proceed in Normal Mode by default. This routing is a one-time decision per prompt; the agent does not switch modes mid-execution unless the user explicitly requests it. 

Plan Mode: subagent-based planning. Rather than switching the main agent into a restricted mode via dedicated plan-management tools, O PEN DEV delegates planning to a first-class Planner subagent. When planning is needed, the main agent calls spawn_subagent(type="Planner") , which launches a subagent with read-only tools and a specialized planning prompt. Write operations are excluded from the subagent’s 8Figure 5: Dual-mode operation within the Agent layer (Figure 4). A user prompt enters the MainAgent , which routes to either Plan Mode (left, read-only) or Normal Mode (right, full access). Plan Mode spawns a Planner subagent that explores the codebase, analyzes patterns, and produces a structured plan for user approval. Upon approval, the system transitions to Normal Mode, where the agent executes the planned steps with full tool access. The user can re-enter Plan Mode at any point if unexpected results require re-planning. tool schema entirely: the LLM never sees tool definitions it cannot use, eliminating the possibility of write attempts during planning. The Planner subagent executes in three stages visible in Figure 5. First, it explores the codebase using read-only tools: reading files, searching code, listing directory contents, and resolving symbol definitions. Second, it analyzes the findings, identifying patterns, evaluating risks, considering trade-offs, and determining the sequence of changes needed. Third, it writes a structured plan to a file in the scratch directory, containing seven sections: goal, context, files to modify, new files to create, implementation steps, verification criteria, and risks. Upon completion, the Planner returns the plan file path to the main agent. The main agent then calls 

present_plan(plan_file_path) , which displays the plan to the user for review. The user has two choices: 

revise (the main agent can spawn the Planner again with feedback) or approve (the agent proceeds to execution in Normal Mode). This design eliminates the need for a separate mode manager state: the main agent stays in Normal Mode throughout, and planning is simply a subagent delegation. 

Normal Mode: full execution. Normal Mode is the default and only operating state. The agent has full access to all tools, including file reading, file writing, code editing, command execution, and subagent spawning. After a plan is approved via present_plan , the agent works through the planned steps, using the task management tools to track progress. During execution, if the agent encounters unexpected results (such as a test failure that reveals a deeper issue, a dependency conflict, or a scope change), it can spawn the Planner subagent again with the current codebase state as context, producing a revised plan that accounts for what has changed since the original plan was approved. 9Rationale for subagent-based planning. The initial design used a four-tool state machine (enter_plan_mode , exit_plan_mode , create_plan , edit_plan ) that switched the main agent into a restricted planning state. This was brittle: the agent sometimes failed to exit plan mode, leaving the system stuck in a read-only state requiring manual intervention. The current design eliminates this state machine entirely. Planning is delegated to a Planner subagent with a schema that contains only read-only tools, enforcing the separation at the schema level rather than through runtime permission checks. The Planner cannot write because write tools do not exist in its schema, not because a runtime check blocks the attempt. This yields three advantages: (1) no state machine means no risk of getting stuck in plan mode; (2) the Planner can be spawned concurrently with other subagents (e.g., a Code Explorer for parallel analysis); and (3) the tool surface is reduced from four tools to one ( present_plan ), reducing cognitive load on the LLM. 

2.2.3 Conversation Lifecycle 

Figure 6 traces the end-to-end path of a single user message through the system, from initial input to final session persistence. 

Figure 6: Sequence diagram of a single conversation turn in O PEN DEV . A user message enters through one of three interfaces, passes through query processing, and enters the ReAct iteration loop. Each iteration comprises context management, optional thinking, an action LLM call, and tool dispatch through the registry. The loop continues until the agent signals completion or a termination condition is met, after which the conversation state is persisted. 

Input ingestion and query processing. User input arrives through one of three entry paths: a non-interactive CLI invocation that creates a one-shot session, the TUI that wraps an interactive REPL, or the Web UI that accepts messages over WebSocket. All three paths converge on the same agent execution core. The TUI path applies a pre-processing stage before entering the ReAct loop: persisting the message to the session store, firing lifecycle hooks that can inspect or modify the query, expanding inline file references (e.g., 

@file ) into their contents, and assembling the message list in the format expected by the LLM API. The Web and CLI paths invoke the agent directly without pre-processing. 

The iteration cycle. Each iteration of the ReAct loop follows a fixed sequence. First, the executor drains any messages that the UI thread injected since the last iteration, such as follow-up instructions or system signals 10 delivered through a thread-safe queue. Second, the context compactor checks token utilization against the context window and applies reduction strategies if pressure is rising (Section 2.3.6 describes the compaction mechanism). Third, if thinking mode is enabled, a separate LLM call produces a reasoning trace without tool access, preventing premature action. Fourth, the action model receives the full conversation, including any thinking trace, along with the available tool schemas, and returns a response that may contain text, tool calls, or both. When tool calls are present, the executor dispatches them through the tool registry: read-only tools run in parallel via a thread pool (up to five concurrent calls), while write tools run sequentially. If a tool call delegates to a subagent, that subagent runs in an isolated context with filtered tool access and returns a summary to the parent agent. 

Completion and persistence. The loop terminates through one of four paths: the agent responds with text and no tool calls (implicit completion), the agent explicitly signals done via a completion tool, the error-recovery budget is exhausted (the system injects up to three targeted recovery messages per error sequence (Section 2.3.5)), or the iteration count reaches the safety limit. Before accepting termination, the system checks for incomplete task items and pending messages in the injection queue (a thread-safe channel through which the UI can deliver messages mid-execution), deferring completion if either condition holds. Once accepted, the final conversation state is saved to the session store. 

Lifecycle hooks. OPEN DEV exposes lifecycle events that external scripts can observe or inter-cept: SessionStart , UserPromptSubmit , PreToolUse , PostToolUse , PostToolUseFailure , SubagentStart ,

SubagentStop , Stop , PreCompact , and SessionEnd . Hook commands are configured via JSON in global or project settings and receive event context on stdin as JSON. Blocking events ( PreToolUse , UserPromptSubmit ,

SubagentStart ) can prevent the operation (exit code 2 returns a block reason to the agent), mutate tool argu-ments (stdout JSON with tool_input key), or override approval decisions. Non-blocking events fire asyn-chronously after the operation completes. Global and project hooks merge by appending project matchers after global matchers per event type, enabling organization-wide policies combined with repository-specific hooks (e.g., “run eslint after file edits”). 

Cross-cutting concerns. Three mechanisms operate across all phases of the lifecycle. 

Interrupt tokens propagate cancellation requests from the UI to the agent thread, polled at six phase boundaries within each iteration (before and after thinking, before action, during tool execution, and at iteration boundaries). The interrupt system addresses several race conditions through targeted fixes: modal controllers (ask-user dialogs, plan approval) take priority over agent interrupts to prevent orphaned UI state; subprocess creation uses process groups ( start_new_session=True ) so that os.killpg reliably terminates child processes; and a one-shot guard prevents duplicate interrupt messages from rapid key presses. A thread-safe injection queue allows users to send follow-up messages while the agent is mid-execution; these messages are drained at iteration boundaries and checked before completion, ensuring that no user input is silently dropped. 

Session cost tracking records cumulative token usage and cost after each LLM call via a CostTracker service that computes cost from the API’s reported token counts and the model’s pricing metadata; running totals are displayed in the TUI status bar and persisted in session metadata for resumption across --continue 

invocations. 

2.2.4 REPL Command Dispatch 

The conversation lifecycle described above assumes that user input enters the agent reasoning loop. However, not all input requires LLM involvement. Session management, mode switching, model selection, and MCP server configuration are deterministic operations that can be handled directly by the REPL without invoking the agent. The system therefore implements a dual-path dispatch at the input boundary: if the input begins with a “ /” prefix, it is routed to a registered command handler; otherwise, it proceeds to the query processor and enters the agent loop. Figure 7 illustrates this architecture. 11 Figure 7: Dual-path input dispatch in O PEN DEV . User input is classified at the REPL boundary: slash commands (top path) are routed through the REPL Command Dispatcher to one of nine registered command handlers, each of which modifies system state directly and returns a CommandResult . Natural language queries (bottom path) pass through the Query Processor into the Agent Loop, which interacts with system state through tool execution. Both paths ultimately produce side effects on shared system state, but through fundamentally different mechanisms: commands execute deterministically without LLM involvement, while queries are processed through the full reasoning loop. 

Command handler abstraction. All command handlers extend a common abstract base class that provides the handler interface and standardized output formatting. Each handler receives a reference to the REPL instance at construction, granting access to the shared managers (session, mode, configuration, MCP) through explicit dependency injection rather than global state. The handler’s handle(args) method performs argument parsing, executes the operation, and returns a CommandResult containing a success flag, a human-readable message, and optional structured data. Commands with subcommands (e.g., /mcp connect , /agents create ) perform a second-level split on the argument string and dispatch internally to the appropriate method. 

Handler categories. As shown in Figure 7, nine handler classes cover the system’s interactive control surface. Session commands (/clear , /compact ) manage conversation state: clearing saves the current session and starts fresh, while compacting triggers context reduction on demand. Mode commands (/mode ) switch between normal and plan mode by setting a pending flag that the query processor reads on the next user query. Configuration commands (/models ) present an interactive model selector that, upon selection, triggers a full agent rebuild with the new model configuration. MCP commands (/mcp ) expose eleven subcommands for managing Model Context Protocol servers: connecting, disconnecting, listing tools, and testing server health. Agent , skills , and plugin commands manage custom agent definitions, reusable prompt templates, and third-party extensions, respectively. Tool commands (/init ) initialize codebase context, and a help command 

lists all available commands. 

Side effects on system state. Commands do not produce isolated outputs; they modify shared state that subsequent agent interactions depend on. As depicted in the right column of Figure 7, both command handlers and the agent loop converge on the same system state. For example, /models triggers a full reconstruction of the agent factory, rebuilding tool registries and system prompts with the new model’s capabilities. /mcp connect discovers and registers new tools from the connected server, expanding the tool schemas available to the agent on its next turn. /mode plan sets a flag that causes the query processor to activate planning behavior on the next query. These side effects are the primary mechanism through which commands influence agent behavior without directly entering the reasoning loop. 12 Separation from agent tools. The distinction between REPL commands and agent tools is architectural, not incidental. Commands are triggered by the user typing a slash prefix, executed synchronously by the REPL, and require no LLM involvement, no tool-use hooks, no approval gates, and no undo tracking. Agent tools, by contrast, are selected by the LLM during reasoning, executed through the tool registry with pre-and post-execution hooks, subject to user approval based on the configured autonomy level, and tracked by the undo manager. Commands operate on the REPL instance; tools operate within a run context that carries agent dependencies. This separation ensures that system-level operations (changing models, managing servers, resetting sessions) remain fast and predictable, while delegating open-ended problem-solving to the agent loop. 

2.2.5 Workload-Optimized Multi-Model Architecture 

A core realization of the compound AI systems paradigm [ 100 ] is that different execution phases benefit from different model capabilities. Reasoning tasks benefit from extended thinking without tool distraction. Visual tasks require vision-language models. Bulk summarization benefits from cheaper, faster models. Using a single model for all tasks either wastes cost (using expensive models for simple tasks) or sacrifices quality (using cheap models for complex reasoning). Three approaches were considered: a single model for everything (simple but inflexible), task-specific routing (adopted here, which introduces complexity in selection logic but enables workload optimization), and ensemble execution (maximum quality but prohibitive latency and cost). 

Five model roles with fallback chains. Five distinct workload categories route to specialized models: 

• Action model: Primary execution model for tool-based reasoning. Default for all workloads unless a specialized model is specified. 

• Thinking model: Optional model for extended reasoning without tool access. Enables focus on strategic planning without tool-calling pressure. Fallback: action model. 

• Critique model: Optional model for self-evaluation. Inspired by Reflexion [ 71 ] but applied selectively rather than on every turn. Fallback: thinking model → action model. 

• Vision model: Vision-language model for processing screenshots and images. Essential for visual debug-ging tasks. Fallback: action model if vision-capable. 

• Compact model: Smaller, faster model for summarization during context compaction. Prioritizes speed and cost over reasoning depth. Fallback: action model. 

Provider abstraction and caching. Each model selection triggers lazy initialization of provider-specific API clients, reducing startup latency, as only models actually used in a session are initialized. Model capabilities (context length, vision support, reasoning features) are cached locally with time-to-live refresh, enabling offline startup and background updates following a stale-while-revalidate pattern. The cache trades potential staleness for startup reliability, with background refresh ensuring eventual consistency. 

2.2.6 Extended ReAct Execution Loop 

Once a mode is selected, the agent processes each user query through the ReactExecutor , which implements an extended version of the Reason-Act loop [ 96 ] (referred to simply as the ReAct loop throughout this paper). Figure 8 illustrates the full execution pipeline. Standard ReAct [ 96 ] interleaves reasoning and action in the same turn, which limits deliberation. Tool schemas consume context and create pressure to act quickly rather than think deeply. Four approaches were considered: pure ReAct (simple but biased toward premature action), chain-of-thought prompting (inflexible because it cannot adapt depth to task complexity), a separate thinking phase (enables depth control and prevents premature tool use), and Reflexion-inspired self-critique loops (maximum quality but doubles thinking latency). O PEN DEV combines the latter two: an explicit thinking phase before action, with optional self-critique for complex tasks. 13 Figure 8: Detailed view of the ReAct loop at the center of Figure 4. Each user query passes through an initialization stage that creates an IterationContext , then enters an iteration loop ( _run_iteration_inner )consisting of four phases: context management, thinking, action, and decision. The loop continues until the agent produces a final response, explicitly signals completion, or exhausts its iteration budget. 

Initialization. When a query arrives, the executor clears any pending injection queue, creates an interrupt token for cancellation support, wraps the conversation history in a ValidatedMessageList (which enforces correct message alternation), and bundles everything into an IterationContext . This context object carries all per-query state: iteration counters, one-shot guard flags (to prevent duplicate signals), and references to shared services such as the tool registry and approval manager. 

Phase 0: Staged context management. At the start of each iteration, the executor drains the injection queue and runs the staged compactor . The compactor monitors token utilization against the context window and applies five progressively aggressive reduction strategies as pressure rises: warning (70%), observation masking (80%), fast pruning (85%), aggressive masking (90%), and full LLM-based compaction (99%). Section 2.3.6 details each stage; the key property is that cheaper strategies (masking, pruning) often reclaim sufficient space, avoiding the cost of full LLM summarization. 

Phase 1: Thinking. If thinking mode is enabled, the executor calls a separate thinking LLM with a tool-free copy of the conversation. This model produces a reasoning trace (a structured analysis of the current situation, potential approaches, and risks) without access to tools, so it cannot take premature action. Separating thinking from action prevents premature tool use: when tools are available, models tend to act quickly rather than think deeply. Four configurable depth levels (OFF, LOW, MEDIUM, HIGH) let users balance latency against deliberation quality on a per-task basis. At the HIGH level, self-critique is automatically included: a critique model evaluates the initial trace, and the thinking model refines its reasoning with the critique as additional input. An earlier design exposed self-critique as a separate fifth level, but users found the distinction confusing; merging it into HIGH simplified the interface without reducing capability, since users who want deep thinking invariably benefit from critique as well. The final trace is injected into the conversation as a system reminder, making the reasoning visible to the action model in the next phase. 

Phase 2: Action. The executor assembles the full action prompt: the system prompt (composed by 

PromptComposer from priority-ordered sections), selected memory bullets from the ACE playbook (Sec-tion 2.3.6), all tool schemas, and the conversation history including any injected thinking trace. This prompt 14 Algorithm 1 Extended ReAct Loop with Five-Stage Compaction and Doom-Loop Detection 

Require: User message m, Agent A, Tool registry T , Session S

Ensure: Response summary, error status, latency  

> 1:

S.add (m); nudge_count ← 0; fingerprints ← deque (maxlen = 20 ) 

> 2:

repeat  

> 3:

// Phase 0: Staged Context Management  

> 4:

p ← token_count (S)/max_context ▷ Context pressure  

> 5:

if p > 0.99 then S ← compact (S) ▷ Full LLM summarization  

> 6:

else if p > 0.85 then prune_old_tool_outputs (S) ▷ Fast pruning pass  

> 7:

else if p > 0.80 then mask_old_observations (S) ▷ Replace old tool results with refs  

> 8:

else if p > 0.70 then log_warning (p) 

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

// Phase 1: Thinking (if enabled)  

> 11:

if thinking_level ̸ = OFF then  

> 12:

trace ← A .call_thinking_llm (S) ▷ No tools  

> 13:

if thinking_level = HIGH then ▷ HIGH includes self-critique  

> 14:

critique ← A .call_critique_llm (trace ) 

> 15:

trace ← A .refine (trace, critique ) 

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

S.add_trace (trace ) 

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

// Phase 2: Action  

> 20:

response, tool_calls ← A .call_llm (S, T ) ▷ With tools  

> 21:

if tool_calls ̸ = ∅ then  

> 22:

// Doom-loop detection  

> 23:

for tc ∈ tool_calls do  

> 24:

fingerprints.append (md5 (tc.name, tc.args ))  

> 25:

end for  

> 26:

if max (Counter (fingerprints ).values ()) ≥ 3 then  

> 27:

approval_pause (“repeated tool call detected” ) 

> 28:

else  

> 29:

for tc ∈ tool_calls do  

> 30:

result ← T .execute (tc ); S.add (tc, result ) 

> 31:

end for  

> 32:

end if  

> 33:

else  

> 34:

if last tool failed ∧ nudge_count < 3 then  

> 35:

S.add (get_smart_nudge (error )) ; nudge_count += 1 

> 36:

else break ▷ Implicit completion  

> 37:

end if  

> 38:

end if  

> 39:

until task_complete called ∨ max iterations reached  

> 40:

return summary, error, latency is sent to the action LLM, which returns a response that may contain text, tool calls, or both. The API’s reported token count is used to calibrate the compactor’s utilization estimates for Phase 0 of the next iteration. 

Phase 3: Decision, dispatch, and doom-loop detection. The executor branches based on whether the action model produced tool calls. If no tool calls are present: when the previous tool failed, the executor classifies the error (permission denied, file not found, syntax error, rate limit, etc.) and injects a targeted 15 recovery nudge (Section 2.3.5); when there are incomplete todos, it nudges the agent to continue; otherwise, a text-only response with no error signals task completion, and the loop terminates. If tool calls are present, the executor first performs doom-loop detection with a two-tier escalation: each tool call is fingerprinted as an MD5 hash of the tool name and its arguments, and fingerprints are tracked in a sliding window of the 20 most recent calls. If any fingerprint appears 3 or more times, the system injects a 

[SYSTEM WARNING] message into the conversation (e.g., “ the agent has called read_file with the same arguments 3 times; try a different approach ”) and skips tool execution for that turn. If the same fingerprint recurs after the warning, the system escalates to an approval-based pause via the ApprovalManager , presenting the user with “ Agent is repeating the same action. Allow / Break? ” On “Allow,” execution resumes with a one-shot guard that permits the action once before re-arming detection. On “Break,” a guidance message is injected into the conversation and the loop resets. This two-tier approach is more robust than warnings alone: LLMs can ignore injected text, but they cannot bypass a genuine execution halt. Pre-existing safeguards (iteration caps, consecutive-read counters) are too coarse: they trigger on any repeated tool type rather than on identical (tool, arguments) pairs, and they activate only after many more iterations. Fingerprint-based detection catches stuck loops within 3 repetitions. When no doom loop is detected, the executor selects an execution strategy (parallel via thread pool for independent calls, sequential for dependent ones), runs the tools through the registry, and records each outcome. After execution, the results feed into the ACE memory pipeline, where a Reflector analyzes what worked and a Curator updates the playbook with new lessons for future queries. The loop then returns to Phase 0 for the next iteration. 

Termination and completion detection. The loop ends through one of four paths: the agent explicitly calls a completion tool with a summary and status (success or failure); the agent produces a text response with no tool calls and no error condition (implicit completion); the error-recovery nudge budget is exhausted (three consecutive failed attempts); or the iteration count reaches a configurable safety limit. If outstanding task items remain when the agent signals completion, the system injects additional nudges to address them before accepting termination to prevent premature completion with incomplete work. In all cases, the final conversation state is persisted to the session store. 

Design evolution. Early experiments applied self-critique on every thinking output; this proved too slow for routine operations, motivating selective activation only at the HIGH thinking level. Doom-loop detection was added after observing agents repeatedly calling the same tool with identical arguments (e.g., reading a non-existent file in a loop); existing safeguards based on iteration counts and consecutive-read counters were too coarse to catch this pattern. Staged compaction (Section 2.3.6) and todo-based completion validation (Section 2.3.4) addressed additional failure modes discovered during this phase. 

2.2.7 Subagent Orchestration 

Some tasks benefit from focused expertise (codebase exploration, user clarification) while others require coordination with main agent state (task management). The main agent can spawn specialized subagents for specific subtasks, each with filtered tool access and specialized prompts. Subagents execute in isolated contexts with their own iteration budgets, preventing unbounded execution. 

Subagent specialization. Different subagents serve different roles: 

• Code explorer: Read-only tools for codebase navigation. Specialized for understanding existing code structure. 

• Strategic planner: Read-only tools plus extended reasoning. Focuses on high-level planning without execution. 

• Web tools: Web fetching and file writing for cloning web content. Combines retrieval with persistence. 

• User clarification: Minimal toolset for gathering input. Focuses on eliciting information without distrac-tion. 16 Tool filtering rationale. Subagent capabilities are deliberately restricted for three reasons. First, task management tools are excluded from subagents so that only the main agent coordinates todo lists, preventing race conditions and inconsistent state. Second, limited tool access reduces context size and focuses each subagent on its specific role, meaning an exploration subagent does not need write capabilities. Third, restricted tools limit the blast radius of errors: an exploration subagent cannot accidentally modify files. 

Parallel execution. The main agent can spawn multiple subagents concurrently (each in its own thread) for independent queries such as parallel file searches, codebase exploration, or web fetches. The system prompt explicitly guides the agent on when and how to parallelize: when the user requests multiple independent analyses, when exploring a large codebase, or when tasks have no data dependencies. Making multiple 

spawn_subagent calls in the same response triggers automatic parallel execution. Upon completion, the agent is instructed to synthesize all subagent results into a single unified response organized by topic, rather than summarizing each agent separately. This trades thread overhead for latency reduction on independent operations. 

Subagent prompt refinements. Subagent prompts include explicit termination conditions to prevent over-exploration. The Code Explorer subagent has stop conditions (“ stop when evidence is clear ,” “ stop if progress stalls ,” “ prefer depth over breadth ”) and an anti-loop instruction (“ re-reading the same file triggers immediate stop ”). The Planner subagent is instructed to include the plan_file_path in its completion summary so the main agent can immediately pass it to present_plan . The thinking-mode prompts encourage spawning Code Explorer subagents for tasks requiring deep codebase analysis. 

Design evolution. Early versions gave subagents the same tools as the main agent. This caused context pollution, role confusion, and conflicts when both agents attempted to update todos simultaneously. Restrict-ing each subagent’s tool set to its specific role improved both focus and efficiency. Early subagent prompts lacked clear stop conditions, leading to unbounded exploration where the Code Explorer would read the same files repeatedly; adding explicit stop conditions and anti-loop instructions resolved this. The agent core produces reasoning traces and tool calls; the Context Engineering Layer, described next, manages what the model sees at each step, shaping the inputs that determine every decision the agent makes. 

2.3 Context Engineering Layer 

LLM-based agents do not simply send user messages to a model and receive responses. The quality of every response is determined primarily by what the model is allowed to see in its context window: which instructions it receives, how much conversation history is retained, what it has learned from prior interactions, and how relevant external information is assembled before each call [ 36 , 53 , 98 ]. We refer to the set of mechanisms that manage this window collectively as the Context Engineering Layer [36, 53, 98]. Figure 9 shows the subsystems and their interactions. A user query enters via the QueryProcessor , which hands off to ContextPicker for context assembly. The assembled context passes through ContextCompactor 

for token-budget enforcement before entering the ReAct reasoning loop. Each turn, the result flows back to the SessionManager for persistence, and tool outcomes that represent learning opportunities are processed by the adaptive memory subsystem. The remainder of this section presents each subsystem in the order it first influences the context window within a session. A final subsection (Section 2.3.7) synthesizes these components into a unified end-to-end pipeline from user query to LLM API call. 

2.3.1 Dynamic System Prompt Construction 

In an LLM-based agent, the system prompt is the primary instrument of behavioral control: it encodes the agent’s identity, capability boundaries, safety constraints, and task conventions. Every behavioral property that cannot be enforced through code, how the agent reasons, which tools it prefers, how it recovers from 17 Figure 9: Expanded view of the Tool & Context layer from Figure 2. Six subsystems cooperate to fill and maintain the model’s context window across a session. The subsystems are presented in lifecycle order: dynamic system prompt construction initializes behavioral instructions; dual-memory and tool result optimization shape what enters the context; system reminders and error recovery inject targeted guidance at runtime; and adaptive context compaction manages overflow when the token budget nears exhaustion. errors, is expressed as natural language in the system prompt. Getting this prompt right at startup is therefore not a minor configuration detail; it is the central initialization problem. A naive approach loads a single monolithic prompt containing every possible instruction. This has two compounding costs. First, sections that are irrelevant to the current session (such as git workflow rules in a non-repository directory, subagent orchestration guidance when subagents are unused, or task-tracking instructions when the feature is disabled) consume context-window budget without contributing any behavioral value. Second, irrelevant instructions dilute the sections that do matter, making the agent’s behavior noisier. The fix is not to trim the prompt by hand, but to make loading context-sensitive from the start. 

Priority-ordered conditional composition. OPEN DEV assembles each agent’s system prompt at runtime through the pipeline illustrated in Figure 10. Behavioral instructions are factored into independent sections ,each stored as a separate markdown file and registered with two metadata fields: a condition predicate over a runtime context dictionary ( None means always include), and a priority integer that controls reading order. At initialization the PromptComposer executes four steps: 1. Filter. Evaluate each section’s predicate against the current environment snapshot. Sections that re-turn False are excluded before any file I/O occurs. For example, main-git-workflow.md is gated on 

in_git_repo ; it is never loaded when the working directory is not a repository. 2. Sort. Order the surviving sections by ascending priority: lower values appear earlier, placing identity and persona rules before environment-derived context. 3. Load. Read each markdown file, strip human-readable frontmatter, and resolve ${VAR} placeholders via a centralized name registry that decouples template prose from concrete tool identifiers. 4. Join. Concatenate loaded sections and append to the core role text and dynamically collected environment block, producing the complete system prompt. 18 Figure 10: Detailed view of the prompt composition subsystem from Figure 9. Sections are registered with optional condition predicates and priority values. At agent initialization the PromptComposer evaluates each predicate against the runtime environment, sorts surviving sections by ascending priority, loads their markdown templates, and joins them into the final system prompt. Four logical tiers, Core Identity, Tool Definitions, Safety & Rules, and Dynamic Context, which organize sections by function. Dashed borders indicate conditionally loaded sections that are included only when their predicate is satisfied. The default action-mode agent registers modular sections across five functional tiers: Core Identity for persona and non-negotiable constraints, Tool Definitions for tool-use and code-quality guidance needed during execution, Safety & Rules for conditionally loaded policies such as git conventions and task-tracking instructions, Provider-Specific Guidance for LLM-provider-specific behavioral hints, and Dynamic Context for session-specific metadata. The thinking-mode agent registers fewer sections, deliberately omitting tool-use guidance to avoid biasing tool-free reasoning toward premature action. Section C provides the complete section registry with conditions and summaries for all main and thinking sections; Section K reproduces the verbatim content of every template. 

Mode-specific variants and variable substitution. Different reasoning phases require fundamentally differ-ent prompts. Normal (action) mode loads all registered sections across five tiers. Thinking mode, a tool-free reasoning pre-phase, loads only a small set of purpose-built sections: available-tool awareness (so the model knows what actions are possible without being tempted to invoke them), subagent guidance, code-reference conventions, and output-format rules. Planning mode uses a standalone template optimized for read-only ex-ploration. This mode specialization is achieved through a factory function: create_composer(templates_dir, mode="system/main") returns the full action composer, while mode="system/thinking" returns the minimal thinking composer. Templates use ${VAR} placeholders resolved at render time by a PromptRenderer . A centralized 

PromptVariables registry maps symbolic names to concrete tool identifiers; for example, ${EDIT_TOOL.name} 

resolves to edit_file . This indirection decouples template prose from tool naming: renaming a tool requires changing one registry entry rather than editing every template. 

Provider-specific conditional sections. Different LLM providers have meaningfully different capabilities and conventions: Anthropic models support tool_use content blocks and extended thinking, OpenAI models use function calling with structured output support, and inference providers like Fireworks have different context window limits. Without provider-specific guidance, the agent may reference capabilities it does not have. The PromptComposer addresses this with mutually exclusive conditional sections gated on the model_provider field from the runtime environment context. Exactly one provider section (OpenAI, 19 Anthropic, Fireworks) is included per prompt based on the active provider, and unknown providers receive no section (graceful degradation). 

Provider-level prompt caching. For providers that support input caching (currently Anthropic), the 

PromptComposer offers a compose_two_part() method that splits the assembled prompt into a stable part and a 

dynamic part. Each section is annotated with a cacheable flag (defaulting to True ); sections marked cacheable (base instructions, tool descriptions, safety policy) are concatenated into the stable part, and the remainder (environment metadata, session-specific context) into the dynamic part. The AnthropicAdapter structures these as a two-element content array: the stable block carries a cache_control: {"type": "ephemeral"} 

header, while the dynamic block carries none. Since the system prompt is re-sent on every LLM call and the stable portion typically comprises 80–90% of the total, caching it yields substantial cost savings over a multi-turn session (approximately 88% reduction in input token cost for the cached portion). Providers that do not support this mechanism receive the full concatenated prompt as a single string, with no behavioral difference. 

Two-tier fallback. If an individual section file is missing, the composer skips it and proceeds, so the agent starts with a slightly reduced prompt rather than failing. If modular composition fails wholesale (e.g., the templates directory is absent), the builder falls back to a monolithic core template. This guarantees agent startup under partial-deployment conditions. 

2.3.2 Tool Result Optimization 

Raw tool outputs consume far more tokens than their informational value warrants. A single read_file 

may return 2,000–3,000 tokens of source code, a directory listing may enumerate hundreds of entries, and a test-runner invocation may produce thousands of lines of TAP output. Left unchecked, verbose results dominate the context window within a few iterations, crowding out the user query and system instructions that drive the agent’s behavior. Tool result optimization addresses this by transforming raw outputs into compact, semantically preserving representations before they enter the conversation history. 

Per-tool-type summarization. Each tool result passes through a dedicated summarizer that maps the tool name and raw output to a concise summary (typically 50–200 characters). The summarizer is dispatched by tool name and applies a type-specific compression strategy: 

• File reads are replaced with metadata: “ ✓ Read file (142 lines, 4,831 chars) ”. The full content remains available through re-reading, but the context carries only the proof that the read occurred and the file’s approximate size. 

• Search results report match counts rather than matched lines: “ ✓ Search completed (23 matches found) ”. When a search returns no results, the summary reflects this explicitly so the agent can redirect. 

• Directory listings are collapsed to item counts: “ ✓ Listed directory (47 items) ”. The raw listing, which often contains deeply nested paths, is replaced by a single-line summary. 

• Command execution adapts to output length: short outputs ( ≤100 characters) are retained verbatim; longer outputs report line counts: “ ✓ Command executed (312 lines of output) ”. 

• Errors are truncated to 200 characters with a classified prefix: “ × Error: FileNotFoundError: ... ”. This ensures the agent receives enough information for error recovery (Section 2.3.5) without consuming excessive context on stack traces. 

Large output offloading. For outputs that exceed 8,000 characters (approximately 2,000 tokens), the summarizer is insufficient: the full output would still dominate the context even after summarization. These outputs are offloaded to scratch files before entering the conversation history. The system writes the full output to a session-specific scratch directory ( ~/.opendev/scratch/<session_id>/ ) and replaces the output in the conversation with a 500-character preview plus a reference path: “ [Output offloaded: 2,341 lines, 48,203 chars → <path>]. Use read_file to see full output if needed. ” This creates a natural tiering 20 system: the agent sees enough to understand the content and can read_file the full output on demand, which is itself subject to the same offloading threshold. 

Agent-aware truncation hints. When output is offloaded to a scratch file, the truncation message includes a tailored recovery hint based on the current agent’s capabilities. If the agent has access to subagent delegation (the spawn_subagent tool), the hint suggests: “ Delegate to a Code Explorer subagent to process the full output via search and read tools. ” If the agent lacks subagent capability (e.g., it is a subagent), the hint instead suggests: “Use the search tool with offset/limit parameters to process the output incrementally. ” This agent-aware advice prevents the common failure mode where an agent attempts a recovery strategy unavailable in its tool set, for example, a Code Explorer subagent trying to spawn another subagent. 

Interaction with compaction. Tool result summaries and offloaded outputs serve complementary roles. At ingestion, they provide immediate context savings by replacing the full result in the conversation history. During compaction (Section 2.3.6), the compactor preferentially uses pre-computed summaries when sanitizing messages for LLM-based summarization, avoiding redundant re-processing. This synergy means that even when emergency compaction is triggered, the input to the summarizer LLM is already substantially compressed, improving both the speed and quality of the compaction output. 

Design evolution. Early versions stored full tool output in the conversation history regardless of length. A single long-running test suite could consume 30,000 tokens of context in one tool call. The per-tool summarizer reduced this to under 100 tokens in most cases. Adding the 8,000-character offloading threshold addressed the remaining outliers (large file reads, verbose command outputs) that exceeded the summarizer’s compression ratio, extending typical session length from 15–20 turns (before context overflow) to 30–40 turns without compaction. 

2.3.3 Dual-Memory Architecture for Bounded Thinking 

The thinking phase (Phase 1 of the ReAct loop, Section 2.2.6) requires conversation context for strategic reasoning, but the full conversation history can grow to hundreds of thousands of tokens. Providing the thinking model with unbounded history is infeasible: it would exceed the model’s context window and waste budget on stale detail. Providing only recent messages loses strategic context, causing the agent to “forget” its overall goals. We resolve this tension through a dual-memory architecture inspired by human cognitive science, which separates compressed long-range context from detailed short-range context. 

Episodic memory. An LLM-generated summary of the full conversation history captures strategic, long-range context: decisions already made, overall goals, key findings, and important file paths. The summarizer is instructed to preserve actionable identifiers (file paths, function names, variable names, error codes) while omitting verbose tool outputs and redundant exchanges. This summary is regenerated periodically (every 5 new messages, controlled by a regenerate_threshold parameter) rather than on every turn. Periodic regen-eration serves two purposes: it amortizes the cost of the summarization call, and it prevents summary drift , a phenomenon where iteratively summarizing a summary causes accumulated distortion. By regenerating from the full history, each episodic memory snapshot is a fresh compression rather than a compression of a compression. 

Working memory. The last several message pairs (the most recent 6 exchanges by default, controlled by exclude_last_n ) are reproduced verbatim. These recent messages contain the fine-grained operational details needed for immediate decision-making: exact file contents read in the last few turns, specific error messages, precise line numbers, and the outcome of the most recent tool calls. Summarization would destroy exactly the details that matter most for the next action. 

Combined injection. Before each thinking LLM call, the system constructs the thinking context by concate-nating: (1) the episodic memory summary, providing the “big picture”; (2) the working memory messages, providing operational detail; and (3) the current user query. This structure mirrors the distinction between 21 episodic and working memory in cognitive architecture [ 8 ]: episodic memory stores the gist of past ex-perience for long-range planning, while working memory holds detailed, recently acquired information for immediate use. The thinking token budget remains bounded regardless of conversation length, since the episodic summary has a fixed maximum length (500 characters) and the working memory window is constant. 

Design evolution. Early attempts used pure summarization for the entire history, but critical identifiers (file paths, variable names) were lost, causing the agent to reference non-existent files or misname functions. The opposite extreme, using only recent messages, lost long-range strategic context: the agent would “forget” the user’s original goal after 10 turns. The hybrid architecture addresses both failure modes. We also discovered that summarizing a previous summary (incremental summarization) accumulates errors over multiple rounds; periodic regeneration from the full history corrects this drift. 

2.3.4 Context-Aware System Reminders 

Figure 11: Detailed view of the reminder subsystem from Figure 9. Without reminders (left), an agent with one incomplete todo declares completion, forcing the user to intervene and causing a loss of trust. With reminders (right), the ReactExecutor detects the unfinished state, injects a targeted user-role message listing the outstanding item, and the agent resumes work and completes the task correctly. System reminders address a fundamental reliability problem in long-running agent sessions: as the conver-sation grows, the model’s attention drifts away from the initial system-prompt instructions, leading to silent failures such as premature task completion, abandoned error recovery, and unchecked exploration spirals (Figure 11). 22 Consider a coding agent that is told, in its system prompt, to always run tests after editing code. For the first few turns, it does. But after 20 tool calls, with file contents, search results, and command outputs piling up in the conversation, it quietly stops. The instruction is still there in the system prompt, but the model no longer pays attention to it. The same pattern appears in other forms: an agent told to “ finish all tasks before stopping ” declares victory with half the list incomplete; an agent that hits a file-editing error gives up instead of re-reading the file and retrying, even though its instructions say to retry. The root cause is simple: the system prompt sits at the very beginning of the conversation. As the conversation grows longer, the model’s attention shifts toward recent messages and away from that initial block of instructions. The rules are still present in the context window, but their influence fades with distance. This is not a hypothetical concern; it is a predictable, reproducible failure mode that we observed consistently in sessions exceeding 15 tool calls. Putting all instructions up front works initially but degrades over long sessions. Re-injecting the entire system prompt every few turns wastes tokens on instructions the agent does not currently need. O PEN DEV 

addresses this with system reminders : short, single-purpose messages injected exactly when the agent needs them ,right before the decision point where it would otherwise go wrong. Each reminder is a brief role: user 

message placed at maximum recency in the conversation, immediately before the next LLM call. Figure 12 illustrates the architecture. 

Figure 12: Architecture of the Reminder Injection Layer. After each iteration of the ReAct Executor Loop (top), eight event detectors examine the conversation state. When a detector fires, the corresponding re-minder template is resolved via get_reminder() from reminders.md (with .txt fallbacks for longer prompts), checked against guardrail counters that cap how many times each reminder can fire, and appended to the message list as a role: user message. The next LLM call sees this reminder as the most recent input, maximizing its influence on the model’s next decision. 

Event detectors. As shown in Figure 12, the injection layer monitors eight conditions at the boundary between tool execution and the next LLM call: tool failure without retry (with six error-specific recovery templates), exploration spirals (5+ consecutive reads), denied tool re-attempts, premature completion with incomplete todos, continued work after all todos are done, plan approval without follow-through, unprocessed subagent results, and empty completion messages. Each detector fires its corresponding 23 reminder template from a catalog of named reminders organized into several categories: phase control, task lifecycle, todo enforcement, error recovery, behavioral correction, and JSON retry (Section F provides the full catalog and injection timing). 

Template resolution. All reminder text lives outside source code. A single file ( reminders.md ) stores short templates in named sections delimited by --- section_name --- markers. Longer prompts fall back to standalone .txt files. The entry point get_reminder(name, **kwargs) parses the file once into a module-level cache on first call, looks up the section by name, and fills placeholders (e.g., {count} , {todo_list} ) via 

str.format() . Keeping templates in plain text makes them auditable and editable without touching Python code. 

Guardrail counters. A reminder that fires on every iteration stops being helpful and becomes noise the model learns to ignore. To prevent this, each reminder type is governed by a counter or a one-shot flag tracked in the per-session IterationContext (right column of Figure 12). Incomplete-todo nudges fire at most twice ( MAX_TODO_NUDGES = 2 ); error-recovery nudges fire at most three times ( MAX_NUDGE_ATTEMPTS = 3 ); plan-approved, all-todos-complete, and completion-summary signals each fire exactly once. If the agent does not respond to a capped nudge, the system accepts the agent’s judgment and moves on rather than looping. 

Rationale for role: user . Reminders are injected as role: user messages rather than role: system . After 40 turns of conversation, another system message blends into the background that the model has already partially forgotten. A user message appears at the position of highest recency in the dialogue flow; the model treats it as something that just happened, something requiring a response. Early experiments with 

role: system injection confirmed this: user-role reminders produced noticeably higher compliance rates. 

Graceful degradation. If a reminder template is missing or retrieval fails, the agent still has its system prompt. Reminders reinforce existing instructions; they do not introduce new ones. The system works without them, but it works measurably better with them. 

Design evolution. The initial system relied entirely on the system prompt. In long sessions (30+ tool calls), agents reliably exhibited attention-decay failures: premature completion, exploration loops, and failure to recover from errors. Adding just-in-time reminders resolved each failure mode. Early error recovery used a single generic “ try again ” message; classifying errors into six types with specific guidance substantially improved recovery rates, as “ read the file again ” is more actionable than “ fix the issue .” Before one-shot flags and attempt budgets, some reminders fired on every iteration, causing the agent to loop on the nudge itself; guards were essential for stability. Early experiments also injected reminders as role: system 

messages, which were less effective because the model treated them as background instructions rather than conversational prompts demanding a response. 

2.3.5 Context-Injected Error Recovery 

When a tool call fails, the raw error message enters the conversation as a tool result. Without intervention, the agent often responds with an apology rather than a recovery attempt, because the error message alone does not convey how to recover. Template-based error recovery addresses this by injecting targeted recovery guidance directly into the context window, turning error messages into actionable instructions that the model can follow. The mechanism operates in four steps: (1) classify the error by pattern-matching the message to one of six categories (permission error, file not found, edit mismatch, syntax error, rate limit, timeout); (2) retrieve the corresponding recovery template from a centralized template store; (3) format the template with context-specific details (the failing file path, the mismatched content, the specific error message); and (4) inject the formatted template as a system message immediately before the next LLM call, placing it at maximum recency in the conversation. For example, an edit-mismatch error produces the guidance: “ the file has changed 

24 since you last read it; re-read the file and retry your edit with the current content. ” This is substantially more actionable than a generic retry instruction, because it tells the model what changed and what to do next .A budget of 3 nudge attempts per error sequence prevents infinite retry loops: after three consecutive failed recovery attempts on the same error, the system accepts the failure and allows the agent to proceed or ask the user for help. Templates are stored as plain text outside the source code, making recovery strategies extensible (new error categories require adding a template, not modifying code) and customizable (users can override templates for project-specific recovery patterns). 

2.3.6 Adaptive Context Compaction 

As an agent operates within a ReAct loop, tool observations, such as file contents and command outputs, accumulate and quickly dominate the context window, frequently consuming 70–80% of the available token budget. Standard systems rely on a binary emergency compaction threshold (typically triggered at 95–99% capacity) that performs a lossy summarization of the conversation history. This approach results in late activation, severe information loss, and compounding errors upon subsequent compactions. To mitigate these issues, O PEN DEV monitors token usage incrementally, using the API’s reported 

prompt_tokens count as a calibration anchor, and implements Adaptive Context Compaction (ACC) , a frame-work that manages context pressure through a five-stage pipeline of progressively aggressive reduction strategies (Figure 13). 

Figure 13: Detailed view of the compaction subsystem from Figure 9. Five stages activate at progressive pressure thresholds (70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 99%), transitioning observations between active, faded, and archived states before emergency summarization is required. Rather than waiting for the context window to fill, ACC monitors context pressure at the start of every ReAct iteration and applies five graduated stages: 

• Stage 1 - Warning (70%): Context pressure is logged for monitoring. No data reduction occurs, but the system begins tracking utilization trends. 

• Stage 2 - Observation Masking (80%): Older tool result messages are replaced in-place with compact reference pointers (e.g., [output offloaded to scratch file] ), preserving the conversation structure required by the LLM API while reducing token footprint from thousands of tokens to approximately 15 per observation. The most recent tool outputs are preserved at full fidelity. 25 • Stage 2.5 - Fast Pruning (85%): Before resorting to aggressive masking, a lightweight pruning pass walks backward through tool result messages. Results within a protected recency budget are preserved; older results are replaced with [pruned] markers. Unlike observation masking (which replaces with reference pointers to offloaded files), pruning is a deletion-class operation (content is discarded rather than offloaded) but it targets only outputs well beyond the recency window. This is substantially cheaper than LLM-based compaction and often reclaims enough space to avoid the more disruptive stages entirely. 

• Stage 3 - Aggressive Masking (90%): The preservation window shrinks to only the most recent tool outputs. All other observations are masked. 

• Stage 4 - Full Compaction (99%): The entire conversation history is serialized to a scratch file (ensuring no historical detail is permanently lost), and an LLM-based summarizer compresses the middle portion of the conversation while preserving recent messages verbatim. ACC’s compaction pipeline additionally maintains an Artifact Index , a structured registry of all files touched and operations performed during the session ( read , created , modified , deleted ). This index is serialized into the compaction summary, ensuring the agent remembers what files it has worked with even after context is compressed. The history archive path is also injected into the summary (“ Full conversation history archived at <path> . Use read_file to recover details if needed. ”), making compaction effectively non-lossy: the agent can recover any detail by reading the archive. Quantitative evaluations demonstrate that ACC reduces peak context consumption of observations by approximately 54%, often eliminating the need for emergency compaction entirely over typical 30-turn sessions. 

Figure 14: Detailed view of the memory subsystem from Figure 9. Stage 1: the BulletSelector scores playbook bullets by effectiveness, recency, and semantic similarity to the current query, and the selected bullets are injected into the Generator’s system prompt alongside the user query. Stage 2: an episodic memory mechanism triggers the Reflector every five messages of interaction; the Reflector analyzes accumulated experience and produces a reasoning trace, error identification, root-cause analysis, and correct approach. Stage 3: a Curator reads the reflection and plans concrete playbook mutations (add, update, tag, or remove bullets). Stage 4: the mutations are applied to the Playbook’s bullet table and persisted to a session-scoped JSON file. 

Adaptive memory. Agents working in a project over multiple sessions accumulate experience about which approaches succeed and which do not. The Agentic Context Engineering (ACE) subsystem captures this experience as a playbook : a collection of natural-language bullets, each tagged with effectiveness counters (helpful, harmful, or neutral) and a creation timestamp. Figure 14 illustrates the four-stage pipeline that keeps the playbook current. In Stage 1, the BulletSelector ranks every bullet by a weighted score combining effectiveness (0.5), recency decay (0.3), and semantic similarity to the current query via cosine similarity over 26 cached embeddings (0.2); the top-ranked bullets are injected into the Generator’s system prompt so the agent can act on prior experience. Stage 2 is governed by an episodic memory mechanism: every five messages of agent interaction, the system activates the Reflector to analyze the accumulated experience. The Reflector produces a reasoning trace, error identification, root-cause analysis, and correct approach, which are then distilled into bullet-level effectiveness tags (helpful / harmful / neutral), without proposing any structural changes to the playbook. Stage 3’s Curator reads the reflection and plans concrete mutations: adding new bullets, updating existing ones, re-tagging effectiveness counters, or removing stale entries, emitted as a 

DeltaBatch . Finally, in Stage 4 the mutations are applied to the Playbook’s bullet table and the updated state is persisted to a session-scoped JSON file, ready for the next query cycle. 

2.3.7 Context Retrieval and Assembly Pipeline 

Figure 15: End-to-end synthesis of the retrieval and context components from Figure 9. Four layers transform a user query into a fully assembled LLM API call: (1) retrieval tools gather raw code artifacts, (2) the Code Explorer subagent orchestrates multi-step searches in an isolated context, (3) the context assembler merges retrieved material with conversation history and system instructions, and (4) the context optimizer enforces the token budget through staged compaction before the final API call. Context retrieval is the single most consequential capability of a coding agent: the quality of every down-stream action (editing, testing, planning) is bounded by whether the agent has located the right code in the first place. In traditional RAG pipelines [ 41 ], retrieval is a static, one-shot operation: embed the query, fetch top-k documents, and generate. This works reasonably well for factual question answering over homogeneous corpora, but codebases are fundamentally different. A single user request (“fix the login bug”) may require cross-referencing an authentication handler, a database schema, a test file, and a configuration module, none of which share obvious lexical overlap with the query. Recent work on agentic search [ 85 ]has shown that effective retrieval in complex environments requires the agent to dynamically control when ,

what , and how to retrieve, interleaving reasoning with search rather than treating retrieval as a preprocessing step [ 77 , 96 ]. O PEN DEV instantiates this principle for software engineering through a four-layer pipeline (Figure 15) that progressively escalates from simple lookups to multi-step agentic search to full context assembly and optimization. 27 Layer 1: Anchor-based retrieval tool selection. Five tools form the retrieval surface: read_file for targeted file access, list_files for glob-based discovery, text_search (ripgrep) for pattern matching, find_symbol 

for LSP-based semantic resolution, and ast_search (ast-grep) for structural pattern matching (Sections 2.4.2 and 2.4.5). The central design question is not what tools to provide, but how the agent selects among them. A naive agent defaults to text search for every lookup, a failure mode analogous to the “retrieve-everything” antipattern in traditional RAG [ 6 ]. Effective retrieval instead begins by identifying the strongest anchor in the query: the most specific, highest-signal element that constrains the search space. Symbol names (e.g., 

AuthController.validate ) route to find_symbol , which resolves the definition semantically via LSP; string literals and error messages route to text_search , which performs exact pattern matching; structural patterns (e.g., “all Python if-statements that check is_admin ”) route to ast_search , which matches language-aware templates; and file-path conventions route to list_files for glob-based discovery. By matching the retrieval tool to the anchor type, the agent avoids noisy, low-precision searches and reaches the relevant code in fewer steps. This is the coding-agent analog of Self-Ask’s [ 67 ] decomposition strategy: rather than searching with the raw user query, the agent reasons about what kind of information it needs and selects the retrieval mechanism accordingly. 

Layer 2: Multi-step agentic search via the Code Explorer. Single-tool retrieval suffices when the agent knows exactly what to look for, but many tasks require exploratory retrieval: the agent must follow cross-references, discover unexpected dependencies, and iteratively narrow a broad search space. This is where the system transitions from static tool invocation to the interleaved reasoning-and-retrieval loop characteristic of agentic search [ 77 , 96 ]. When the main agent needs broad codebase understanding rather than a pinpoint lookup, it delegates to the Code Explorer subagent (Sections 2.2.7 and 2.4.8), which runs in an isolated context window with access to the same five retrieval tools in read-only mode. The subagent performs multi-step searches autonomously: it might start with find_symbol to locate a class definition, read the file to discover its dependencies, then use text_search to trace how those dependencies are used across the project. Each step is guided by the subagent’s own reasoning about what it has found so far and what it still needs, embodying the “interleaving retrieval with chain-of-thought” pattern [ 77 ]. Context isolation is critical: intermediate search results (potentially thousands of lines of code) stay in the subagent’s window, and only the distilled summary is returned to the main agent. This prevents the retrieval process itself from consuming the context budget that the main agent needs for reasoning and action. 

Layer 3: Context assembly. Retrieved code artifacts alone are insufficient; the agent also needs its behavioral instructions, accumulated experience, and conversation history. Before each model call, ContextPicker 

assembles the final message list from six ordered sources: (1) the system prompt augmented with selected playbook strategies from the adaptive memory (Section 2.3.6), (2) project-level and user-level persistent rules, (3) inline @file references and image blocks supplied by the user, (4) the conversation history retrieved from 

SessionManager , (5) system reminders injected at the point of decision (Section 2.3.4), and (6) the current user query. Each piece of context is wrapped in a ContextPiece that tracks its provenance (source subsystem, priority, token cost), enabling downstream components to make informed retention decisions when the budget is tight. The assembled structure is validated by ValidatedMessageList , which enforces structural integrity (every assistant message with tool calls must be followed by matching tool results before the next user turn) and auto-repairs violations with synthetic error placeholders rather than failing outright. 

Layer 4: Context optimization. The assembled context passes through the staged compaction pipeline described in Section 2.3.6. Observations follow a lifecycle from active (recent, fully retained) through faded 

(eligible for masking after the 80% threshold) to archived (serialized to disk and replaced with a reference). Token budgets are calibrated against API-reported prompt_tokens from the previous turn rather than local estimates, correcting for provider-side injections (safety preambles, tool schemas) that are invisible to the client. This final optimization step ensures that regardless of how much context was retrieved and assembled, the payload submitted to the LLM respects the model’s context window while preserving the most decision-relevant material. 28 End-to-end flow. The four layers form a retrieval pipeline that mirrors the escalation pattern seen in agentic search systems [ 85 ]: simple queries resolve at Layer 1 with a single tool call; complex queries escalate to Layer 2’s multi-step search; all results converge at Layer 3’s assembly; and Layer 4 enforces the token budget. This progressive escalation means that straightforward lookups (“read file X”) incur minimal overhead, while open-ended exploration (“how does the authentication system work?”) can leverage the full agentic search loop without the cost bleeding into the main agent’s context. The context engineering layer shapes what the model sees; the tool system defines what the model can 

do : the concrete actions through which the agent modifies code, runs commands, and interacts with the development environment. 

2.4 Tool System 

The tools through which the agent interacts with the development environment form an extensible ecosystem that balances comprehensive capability with context efficiency, safety with flexibility, and built-in tools with dynamic discovery. Table 1 in Section A provides a complete catalog of all 35 built-in tools; the remainder of this section describes the registry architecture that organizes them into handler categories, then details each category: file operations, shell execution, web interaction, semantic code analysis via LSP, user interaction and task management, external tool discovery via MCP, and subagent delegation. A defense-in-depth safety architecture spans all categories. 

2.4.1 Registry Architecture and Schema Construction 

A flat namespace of tools becomes unmanageable as capabilities grow: hard-coded dispatch logic is inflexible, and dynamic plugin loading without structure is unsafe. Alternatives range from hardcoded tool sets (simple but cannot add capabilities without code changes) to flat dynamic loading (flexible but chaotic, leading to namespace collisions, lack of organization, and difficult safety management). O PEN DEV adopts a registry with handler categories, organizing tools into handler classes with schema-based registration. 

Three separated concerns. Figure 16 illustrates the architecture. The tool system separates schema con-struction, dispatch routing, and lifecycle hooks into distinct components. 

ToolSchemaBuilder assembles JSON schemas from three sources: (1) static _BUILTIN_TOOL_SCHEMAS 

defining approximately 40 built-in tools, with descriptions loaded from markdown templates via 

load_tool_description() ; (2) dynamically discovered MCP schemas, including only those tools in the 

_discovered_mcp_tools set to avoid context bloat; and (3) subagent schemas injected by the SubAgentManager 

when present. The assembled schemas are injected into the LLM prompt, giving the model awareness of available capabilities. 

ToolRegistry serves as the central dispatcher, mapping tool names to handler methods across 12 handler classes organized by category (file, process, web, notebook, user interaction, task management, thinking, MCP discovery, batch execution; see Table 1 in Section A for the complete mapping). Each handler receives a 

ToolExecutionContext that bundles cross-cutting services: mode manager, approval manager, undo manager, task monitor, session manager, UI callback, and file-time tracker. The registry enforces mode restrictions by blocking write operations in plan mode with informative errors before dispatching to handlers. 

Lifecycle hooks provide extensibility without modifying handler code. The hook system defines ten life-cycle events ( SESSION_START , USER_PROMPT_SUBMIT , PRE_TOOL_USE , POST_TOOL_USE , POST_TOOL_USE_FAILURE ,

SUBAGENT_START , SUBAGENT_STOP , PRE_COMPACT , SESSION_END , and STOP ) covering the full agent lifecycle from session initialization to shutdown. PreToolUse hooks fire synchronously before execution: a hook returning exit code 2 hard-blocks the tool call, returning an error to the model that no amount of prompt engineering or approval configuration can override. Hooks can also mutate tool arguments by returning a JSON ob-ject with an updatedInput field, enabling transparent command rewriting (e.g., injecting --dry-run flags). 

PostToolUse and PostToolUseFailure hooks fire asynchronously via a thread pool after execution, suitable for auditing and logging without delaying the agent. External scripts registered as hooks receive full event 29 Figure 16: Expanded view of the Tool layer from Figure 2. ToolSchemaBuilder assembles JSON schemas from three sources (static built-in definitions, dynamically discovered MCP tools, subagent schemas) and injects them into the LLM prompt. ToolRegistry dispatches tool calls to category-based handlers, each receiving a ToolExecutionContext with cross-cutting services. Pre/post lifecycle hooks intercept calls for safety enforcement and extensibility. context as JSON on stdin (including session ID, working directory, tool name, tool input, and (for post-hooks) tool response), enabling project-specific policies such as blocking writes to protected paths, enforcing naming conventions, or streaming audit logs to external systems. Hook matchers use compiled regex patterns against tool names, allowing fine-grained targeting from single-tool rules to catch-all policies. 

Design evolution. Early versions registered tools directly in a global namespace, causing naming collisions and complex per-tool safety configuration. Category-based handlers solved both: safety rules apply at the category level, and each category provides implicit namespacing. 

Runtime approval. Before any tool call reaches its handler, the runtime approval system gates execution based on user-configured trust boundaries. Three autonomy levels control the default posture: Manual 

requires explicit approval for every tool call; Semi-Auto auto-approves read-only operations (a curated allowlist of commands such as ls , cat , git status ) while prompting for writes; and Auto approves all operations for trusted workflows. Beyond the default level, an ApprovalRulesManager evaluates each command against a prioritized rule set with four rule types: P ATTERN (regex match against the full command string), C OMMAND (exact match), P REFIX (prefix match, e.g., git matching git push ), and D ANGER (regex match with auto-deny semantics). Default danger rules at priority 100 (matching patterns such as rm -rf / ,

rm -rf * , and chmod 777 ) are always active and cannot be overridden by user configuration or approval-level changes. Rules are evaluated in priority order; the first match determines the action (auto-approve, auto-deny, require approval, or require the user to edit the command before execution). Approval rules persist across sessions via two JSON stores: user-global rules at 

˜/.opendev/permissions.json and project-scoped rules at .opendev/permissions.json . When both exist, project rules take priority for the same pattern, enabling per-repository trust boundaries (e.g., a shared project can restrict docker commands that a user’s personal config allows). The approval flow adapts to the active frontend: the TUI presents a blocking prompt_toolkit menu with keyboard navigation, while the Web UI broadcasts an approval_required WebSocket event and polls a threading event with a 300-second 30 timeout, rendering an approval dialog in the browser. Every approval decision (command, action taken, matching rule, and timestamp) is recorded in a CommandHistory for audit. 

2.4.2 File Operations 

Five tools handle all file-system interactions (see File Ops category in Table 1), from reading and writing to structured editing and searching. Together they form the agent’s primary means of code manipulation. 

read_file : Line-numbered file reading. Reads file contents with cat -n style line numbering, providing the agent with precise positional references for subsequent edits. Three parameters control the read window: 

file_path (required), offset (1-based line start, default 1), and max_lines (default 2000). The handler applies several output transformations before returning content to the agent: 

• Binary detection: Non-text files are detected and rejected with descriptive errors rather than returning corrupted byte sequences. 

• Output truncation: Content exceeding 30,000 characters is truncated using a head-tail strategy that preserves the first 10,000 and last 10,000 characters with a truncation marker between them. This ensures the agent sees both the beginning (imports, class declarations) and end (recent additions) of long files. 

• Per-line truncation: Individual lines exceeding 2,000 characters are truncated to prevent minified code or data files from consuming excessive context. 

• Stale-read tracking: A FileTimeTracker records the timestamp of each read. The tracker records 

datetime.now() keyed by (session_id, file_path) on every successful read. Before any edit, 

assert_fresh() verifies that os.path.getmtime(file_path) ≤ read_time + 50ms , where the 50ms tol-erance accommodates filesystem timestamp granularity (FAT32 rounds to 2-second boundaries; NTFS and ext4 offer sub-millisecond precision, but network filesystems introduce jitter). If the assertion fails, the edit is rejected with an error instructing the agent to re-read the file, preventing silent overwrites of concurrent user edits. A threading.Lock per file path serializes concurrent write attempts to the same file. 

write_file : New file creation. Creates new files only by rejecting attempts to overwrite existing files, directing the agent to use edit_file instead. This constraint prevents accidental full-file overwrites, which are a common failure mode when agents reconstruct files from memory rather than applying targeted edits. Parameters: file_path , content , and create_dirs (which auto-creates parent directories when set). The handler runs the approval workflow for write operations, records the action with the undo manager for rollback capability, and returns the file path and byte count on success. 

edit_file : 9-pass fuzzy matching. When an LLM-based agent edits a file, it specifies old_content to find and new_content to replace. In practice, the LLM frequently produces old_content that differs slightly from the actual file: trailing whitespace variations, indentation mismatches, escape sequence differences, or minor reformatting from reconstructing code from memory rather than verbatim copy. A strict exact-match edit tool fails on these cases, producing “content not found” errors that consume context with error messages and recovery attempts. The edit tool implements a chain-of-responsibility pattern with nine replacer classes, each addressing a spe-cific mismatch category, from exact match through whitespace normalization, indentation flexibility, escape handling, and context-aware anchor matching (Section D enumerates all nine passes with descriptions). Each replacer returns the actual substring found in the original file (not the search query), so the replacement pre-serves the file’s original formatting. Debug logging records which pass succeeded. The chain short-circuits on first match, so exact matches incur zero overhead from the fuzzy passes. Beyond matching, the edit handler enforces several safety and observability measures. Stale-read validation rejects edits to files modified since the agent’s last read. Uniqueness verification ensures the match is unambiguous: multiple matches produce errors rather than silent mis-edits. Backup state is created for undo tracking. After a successful edit, the handler calls lsp.touch_file(filepath) to notify the running language server of the change, then waits up to 3 seconds (debounced) for diagnostics. Only Error-severity 31 diagnostics are included; warnings and hints are suppressed to avoid context noise. Up to 20 diagnostics are appended to the tool output as structured feedback (e.g., “ LSP errors detected: line 42: undefined variable ‘foo’ ”), giving the agent immediate feedback and enabling self-correction in the same turn. If no LSP server is running for the file type, the check is silently skipped. A unified diff is generated for display to the user. 

list_files : Directory listing and glob search. Lists directory contents or performs glob-based file search. Parameters: path (directory to list), pattern (glob expression for filtering), max_results (default 100). Results render as a tree display showing directory structure. Common ignore patterns are excluded by default: 

node_modules , .git , __pycache__ , .venv , .DS_Store , and other platform-specific artifacts. Output is capped at 500 entries to prevent context overflow from large repositories. 

search : Dual-mode content search. Supports two search modes addressing complementary needs. With 

type="text" , the tool delegates to ripgrep for high-performance regex-based content search with configurable context lines, supporting the full PCRE2 pattern syntax. With type="ast" , the tool delegates to ast-grep for structural code search using language-aware pattern templates with $VAR wildcards (e.g., if $COND: $BODY 

matches any Python if-statement regardless of specific condition or body content). Parameters: pattern 

(regex or ast-grep template), path (search root), type (“text” or “ast”), lang (language hint for ast mode). Results are capped at 50 matches and 30,000 characters total output. 

Design evolution. The initial edit tool used a two-pass strategy (exact match, then whitespace-stripped match). This was the single largest source of “content not found” errors. Analyzing failure logs revealed that LLM formatting drift falls into distinct, predictable categories (whitespace normalization, indentation shifts, escape sequence differences, partial-context anchoring), each addressable by a targeted matching pass. Generalizing this observation into a chain-of-responsibility architecture with nine progressively relaxed replacers resolved the vast majority of edit failures while preserving exact-match performance through short-circuit evaluation. 

2.4.3 Shell Execution and Background Tasks 

Four tools handle shell execution and background task management (see Process category in Table 1). The agent needs to run arbitrary shell commands for testing, building, and system interaction, but must do so safely; long-running processes like development servers require background execution with output capture. 

run_command : Six-stage shell execution. Figure 17 illustrates the pipeline, which processes every shell command through six stages: (1) safety gates that block dangerous patterns with no override, (2) command preparation that auto-confirms package manager prompts and unbuffers Python output, (3) server detection via regex match against 16 framework patterns (Section E.2) that auto-promotes long-running servers to background mode, (4) execution fork between PTY-based background and piped foreground with process-group isolation, (5) output management with 30k-character head-tail truncation and 100ms polling, and (6) timeout handling with 60-second idle and 600-second absolute limits. Section E provides the full stage-by-stage details and the complete server pattern table. Commands promoted to background are registered with the BackgroundTaskManager , which assigns 7-character hex IDs (from uuid4().hex[:7] , providing ∼268M unique values). Registration creates the task record, opens an output file at /tmp/opendev/{sanitized-dir}/tasks/{id}.output , writes any initial startup output captured during the first 20 seconds, and spawns a daemon thread that continuously streams PTY output to the file via select.select() polling. Tasks transition through four states: RUNNING →

COMPLETED (exit code 0), FAILED (non-zero exit), or KILLED (via signal). Listener callbacks notify the UI of each state transition, enabling real-time status display in the TUI footer. 

list_processes : Background task listing. Returns all tracked background tasks with PID, status (run-ning/completed/failed/killed), and wall-clock runtime. This gives the agent visibility into what processes 32 Figure 17: Detailed pipeline for the Process handler (Figure 16). Commands pass through three safety gates (permission config, allowed-command matching, dangerous pattern blocking), then command preparation (auto-confirm, unbuffered Python), server detection (regex match against 16 patterns for auto-background promotion), execution fork (PTY-based background or piped foreground with process-group isolation), output management (30k char limit with head/tail truncation, 100ms polling), and timeout/interrupt handling (60s idle, 600s absolute, InterruptToken integration). are active, enabling it to check on long-running servers, identify stalled builds, or determine which tasks need attention. 

get_process_output : Task output retrieval. Retrieves the last 100 lines from a background task’s output file by task ID, giving the agent access to server logs, build output, and error messages without needing to re-run the command. This is essential for monitoring development servers, inspecting test results from background runs, and diagnosing failures in long-running processes. 

kill_process : Graceful process termination. Terminates a running background task using graceful esca-lation: send SIGTERM to the entire process group via os.killpg() , wait 5 seconds for graceful shutdown, then escalate to SIGKILL if the process is still running. The daemon output thread is signaled to stop, and the PTY master file descriptor is closed. Process group killing ensures that child processes spawned by the command (e.g., webpack dev server spawning file watchers) are terminated along with the parent. 

Design evolution. The initial implementation used subprocess.run() with a fixed timeout. Development servers invariably hit the timeout and were killed. Activity-based idle timeout solved the server problem, and PTY-based execution solved output buffering issues where programs would produce no visible output until process termination. 

2.4.4 Web Interaction 

Four tools provide web interaction capabilities (see Web category in Table 1) for documentation research, content inspection, and browser-based testing. All web tools are read-only and safe for use in plan mode. 

fetch_url : Browser-engine web fetching. Retrieves web content using Crawl4AI, a browser-engine crawling library built on Playwright. The browser-engine approach handles JavaScript-rendered content that simple HTTP clients would miss (single-page applications, dynamically loaded documentation). HTML is 33 converted to markdown for context-efficient consumption by the LLM. Output is capped at 50,000 characters with a 30-second per-page timeout. File downloads are blocked to prevent disk abuse. For multi-page exploration, the tool supports deep crawling with three configurable strategies: breadth-first (BFS), depth-first (DFS), or best-first (priority by content relevance). Parameters control maximum crawl depth, page limit, and domain filters to prevent crawling beyond the target site. Playwright Chromium is auto-installed on first use, with the installation triggered transparently when the tool is first invoked. 

web_search : Privacy-respecting search. Searches the web via DuckDuckGo, chosen for its privacy-respecting design (no user tracking or search history retention). Returns up to 10 results, each containing title, URL, and text snippet. Domain filters allow restricting results to specific sites (e.g., searching only official documentation domains). The tool returns structured results that the agent can then follow up on with fetch_url for full content retrieval. 

capture_web_screenshot : Visual page capture. Takes full-page screenshots via Playwright’s headless browser. Configurable viewport dimensions (default 1920 ×1080) allow capturing pages at different respon-sive breakpoints. Optional PDF output mode produces paginated documents. Timeout extends up to 180 seconds for complex pages with heavy JavaScript initialization. Returns the screenshot file path, which the agent can reference in subsequent analysis or present to the user. 

open_browser : System browser launch. Opens a URL or local file in the system’s default browser via platform-native commands. Local file paths are automatically converted to file:// URIs. This tool bridges the gap between the agent’s headless environment and the user’s visual workflow, making it useful for previewing generated HTML, reviewing web applications under development, or opening documentation links that require authentication the agent cannot provide. 

Design evolution. The initial implementation used simple HTTP requests via the requests library, which failed on JavaScript-rendered single-page applications that dominate modern documentation and web frameworks. Switching to Crawl4AI with Playwright’s browser engine solved this, enabling full DOM rendering before content extraction. 

2.4.5 Multi-Language Semantic Code Analysis via LSP 

Six tools provide multi-language semantic code analysis via LSP (see Symbols category in Table 1), split into two read-only navigation tools and four structural editing tools. Text-based tools can search for strings but miss semantic structure: finding all usages of a method requires distinguishing method calls from variable names, handling overloading, and tracking references across files. Building custom parsers for each language is infeasible, so O PEN DEV adopts Language Server Protocol integration via standard language servers [ 55 ], reusing a mature ecosystem where each server is maintained by domain experts. 

Four-layer LSP abstraction. Figure 18 illustrates the architecture, organized into four layers that progres-sively translate between agent-facing tool calls and language-server-specific protocol messages. The Agent Tool Layer exposes the six tools described below; each accepts a file path and a symbol name, with language detection, server selection, and protocol translation handled transparently by the lower layers. The Symbol Retriever provides a unified API that resolves symbol names to positions using a NamePathMatcher support-ing exact match ( MyClass.method ), partial path match ( method matching any symbol whose path ends with 

.method ), and wildcard match ( My* matching MyClass , MyModule ). The LSP Server Wrapper handles language detection (30+ file extensions; see Figure 18) and server lifecycle via a singleton pool: one server per language, started lazily, with automatic liveness checks and transparent restart on crash. The Solid Language Server 

manages the low-level LSP protocol through a subprocess handler communicating via JSON-RPC 2.0 over stdio, with two daemon threads per server for I/O, thread-safe request IDs, and configurable per-request timeouts. Each language server extends a common base class with language-specific overrides (initialization parameters, ignored directories, cross-file reference wait times), allowing new languages to be added by dropping in a server class without modifying the core framework. 34 Figure 18: Detailed architecture for the Symbols handler (Figure 16). The system is organized into four layers: Agent Tool Layer (six symbol tools), Symbol Retriever (unified API), LSP Server Wrapper (language detection, per-language server pool, symbol conversion), and Solid Language Server (two-level cache, file buffer management, LSP protocol operations). The Language Server Handler manages subprocess lifecycle and JSON-RPC 2.0 communication with external language server processes. Language detection maps 30+ file extensions to their respective servers, which are started lazily on first query and reused across subsequent requests. To avoid redundant LSP round-trips, each language server maintains a two-level cache keyed by file content hash (MD5). Level 1 caches raw LSP responses; Level 2 caches processed symbol trees with parent-child relationships and body previews. When a file has not changed, queries return from Level 2 without contacting the server. When a file has changed but the raw response schema has not, only Level 2 is recomputed from cached Level 1 data. Cache storage uses pickle serialization in the project’s .solidlsp/cache/<language_id>/ 

directory, with a version field that ensures incompatible caches are discarded. 

find_symbol : Symbol definition lookup. Parameters: symbol_name (supports qualified names like 

MyClass.method , partial matches, and wildcards), optional file_path to scope the search. Returns sym-bol definitions with kind (function, class, variable, etc.), location (file, line, column), name path (e.g., 

module.Class.method ), and body preview (first 200 characters). When multiple matches exist, all are re-turned with their full paths, letting the agent disambiguate. 

find_referencing_symbols : Cross-file reference search. Parameters: symbol_name , file_path (where de-fined), include_declaration (whether to include the definition itself). Semantically finds all references (calls, imports, type annotations) grouped by file. Used for impact analysis before refactoring and for understanding how a symbol is consumed across the codebase. 

rename_symbol : Workspace-wide semantic rename. Parameters: symbol_name , file_path , new_name (vali-dated as a legal identifier: starts with letter or underscore, contains only alphanumeric characters). Applies workspace edits returned by the LSP server’s textDocument/rename in reverse order (bottom-to-top within each file) so that earlier edits do not shift the line numbers of later ones. Only renames code references; strings and comments are left unchanged. 

replace_symbol_body : Body-preserving rewrite. Parameters: symbol_name , file_path , new_body ,

preserve_signature (default true). Detects the body boundary (colon for Python, opening brace for C-like 35 languages) and replaces only the body while keeping the signature, decorators, and docstring intact. This enables the agent to rewrite function implementations without accidentally altering their public interface. 

insert_before_symbol and insert_after_symbol : Positional code insertion. Parameters: symbol_name ,

file_path , content . Inserts content before or after a named symbol at matching indentation level with blank-line separation. Useful for adding methods adjacent to related code, inserting helper functions near their callers, or placing test cases next to the functions they exercise. 

Design evolution. The initial approach considered building custom AST-based analysis using tree-sitter grammars. While tree-sitter provides fast, incremental parsing, it lacks the semantic understanding that language servers provide: type resolution, cross-file reference tracking, and workspace-wide renaming. LSP integration leverages a mature ecosystem where each language server is maintained by domain experts, and the on-demand server lifecycle ensures that resource consumption scales with actual usage rather than the number of supported languages. 

2.4.6 User Interaction, Task Management, and Planning 

Eight tools enable user interaction, task management, and plan-based workflows (see Task Mgmt, User Input, Planning, and Completion categories in Table 1). They form the human-in-the-loop backbone of the system, ensuring the agent can gather requirements, report progress, and obtain approval at critical decision points. 

ask_user : Structured multi-choice questions. Presents up to four questions per invocation, each with a structured format designed for efficient user interaction. Every question includes: a header label (max 12 characters, displayed as a compact chip/tag for visual scanning), 2–4 options each with a label and description explaining implications, and an optional multiSelect flag for non-exclusive choices. An “Other” option with free-text input is auto-appended to every question, ensuring users are never constrained to the agent’s proposed choices. The rendering adapts to the active UI: the TUI presents questions as a modal dialog with keyboard navigation, while the Web UI uses a polling-based survey component where the agent’s thread blocks until the user submits a response via WebSocket. This blocking-with-timeout design ensures the agent waits for user input without consuming CPU or progressing with assumptions. 

Task tracking ( write_todos , update_todo , complete_todo , list_todos ): Lightweight kanban task list. 

Four tools manage a lightweight kanban-style task list that persists across agent iterations: 

• write_todos : Creates or replaces the entire task list from a structured definition. Each task has a title, description, and status (todo, doing, done). 

• update_todo : Modifies an existing task by numeric ID, title, or slug. Enforces the constraint that at most one task can have “doing” status at a time: setting a new task to “doing” automatically returns the previously active task to “todo”. 

• complete_todo : Marks a task as done with an optional completion log message recording what was accomplished. 

• list_todos : Returns all tasks sorted by status priority: doing first, then todo, then done. This ordering ensures the agent’s attention is drawn to active and pending work. 

present_plan : Plan review and approval. Reads the plan file (written by the agent during plan mode), displays its contents to the user, and requests explicit approval before proceeding to implementation. The user responds with one of three outcomes: 

• approve_auto : Approve the plan and auto-approve all subsequent edits that implement it, minimizing approval friction for trusted plans. 36 • approve : Approve the plan but review each individual edit during implementation, maintaining fine-grained control. 

• modify : Reject with feedback, providing specific changes the agent should incorporate before re-presenting. On approval, plan steps are automatically extracted into the todo list, creating a structured execution tracker that the agent uses to methodically implement each step and report progress. 

task_complete : Explicit completion signal. Signals that the agent has finished its current task, providing a summary message and success/failure status. This tool serves a critical architectural role: it gives the ReAct executor a structured termination signal, distinguishing intentional completion from iteration exhaustion (hitting the maximum iteration limit). Without this tool, the agent would either loop until cut off or produce an unstructured final message, making it difficult for the system to determine whether the task was actually completed. 

Design evolution. Early versions lacked structured user interaction; the agent output free-text questions that were difficult to parse reliably. Introducing the structured multi-choice format with typed options and descriptions improved response quality, reduced misunderstanding, and enabled the UI to render consistent survey-style dialogs across both TUI and Web interfaces. 

2.4.7 Token-Efficient External Tool Discovery via MCP 

One tool, search_tools , provides token-efficient external tool discovery via the Model Context Protocol [ 2](see Discovery category in Table 1). External tools discovered through search are then invoked via the 

McpToolHandler , which dispatches calls to the appropriate server. The core problem is context efficiency: a system with 100 external tools, each schema averaging 200 tokens, consumes 20,000 tokens purely for tool definitions. Including all schemas is wasteful; excluding external tools entirely limits capability. O PEN DEV 

adopts lazy discovery: tools are found on-demand through keyword search, and only discovered tool schemas are included in the context. Figure 19 illustrates the three-component interaction. The system integrates MCP for dynamic tool connec-tivity. Users configure external tool servers (database clients, API services, etc.) via management commands. The system maintains a set of discovered tools, including only schemas for tools explicitly searched for or pre-viously invoked. Initial context contains zero external tool schemas. When the agent calls search_tools (e.g., with query "database query tools" ), the SearchToolsHandler builds a vocabulary from all registered MCP tool names and descriptions, extracts keywords (tokens of 3+ characters), and scores each tool against the query using vocabulary matching. Top matches are returned to the LLM with names and descriptions. The 

ToolRegistry then marks matched tools as discovered via discover_mcp_tool() , adding their schemas to the discovered set so that the next LLM call includes them. Directly invoking an MCP tool by its qualified name (e.g., mcp__github__create_issue ) auto-discovers it without requiring a prior search. The McpToolHandler 

forwards invocations to the appropriate external server, managing serialization and error handling. 

search_tools : Keyword-scored tool discovery. Three detail levels control context investment: names 

returns only tool names (minimal tokens), brief adds short descriptions, and full triggers full schema inclusion in subsequent LLM calls. Name matches score 2 points and description matches score 1 point; results rank by total score, surfacing the most relevant tools first. This trades discovery overhead (the agent must search, then invoke) for context savings (only relevant tools are loaded). For workflows using few external tools, the savings are substantial; for workflows using many, the overhead accumulates but remains bounded. 

Design evolution. The initial implementation included all external tool schemas in every call, consuming up to 40% of the context before the first user message. Lazy discovery reduced baseline overhead to nearly zero ( <5%), growing only as capabilities are actually used. 37 Figure 19: Sequence within the Tool layer (Figure 16). The LLM issues a search_tools call with a natural-language query. The SearchToolsHandler builds a keyword vocabulary from all registered MCP tool names and descriptions, scores each tool against the query, and returns top matches. The ToolRegistry marks matched tools as discovered, including their schemas in subsequent LLM calls. Only discovered tools incur schema cost, reducing baseline token overhead of MCP integration to near zero. 

2.4.8 Subagent Delegation, Skills, and Batch Execution 

This section describes three tools that extend the agent’s capabilities beyond single-tool invocations: subagent delegation for complex subtasks, skill loading for on-demand domain expertise, and batch execution for multi-tool efficiency. 

Subagent delegation via spawn_subagent . Launches an isolated subagent with its own ReAct loop and filtered tool registry. Each of the eight subagent types restricts available tools to its domain: Code-Explorer (read-only navigation), Planner (read + write for plans), PR-Reviewer (code review with diff analysis), Security-Reviewer (vulnerability scanning), Web-Clone (website replication), Web-Generator (site creation from specifications), Project-Init (scaffold generation), and Ask-User (UI-only structured surveys). The tool isolation ensures subagents cannot accidentally interfere with each other or exceed their intended scope. Section G provides the complete capability matrix with per-subagent tool lists. A key design property is automatic parallelization: when the main agent emits multiple spawn_subagent 

calls in the same LLM response, the SubAgentManager executes them concurrently via asyncio.gather() ,with each subagent running in a separate thread with its own iteration budget and tool worker pool. This enables the agent to fan out work naturally (e.g., “investigate the authentication module” and “review the database schema” in parallel) without explicit concurrency management. Additional parameters provide flexibility: model override (haiku for fast, low-cost tasks; sonnet for balanced capability; opus for complex reasoning), background execution (agent continues without waiting for comple-tion), and session resume by agent ID (enabling multi-turn subagent workflows where context is preserved across invocations). 

On-demand skills via invoke_skill . Skills are modular knowledge units stored as markdown files with YAML frontmatter, providing domain-specific expertise (git conventions, code review checklists, deployment procedures) that would waste context if loaded unconditionally. The system processes skills in two phases: 38 Phase 1: Metadata discovery. At startup, the SkillLoader scans all skill directories, parsing only the YAML frontmatter to extract names and descriptions. This lightweight index is included in the system prompt, enabling the agent to discover available expertise without loading instructional content. Descriptions follow a “Claude Search Optimization” convention where each begins with “Use when. . . ” to specify trigger conditions (e.g., “Use when writing bash scripts that need to wait for external conditions”), optimizing for agent discoverability. 

Phase 2: On-demand loading. When the agent determines a skill is relevant, it invokes invoke_skill 

with the skill name. The loader reads the full markdown content, strips the frontmatter, and injects the instructional body into the conversation context. A deduplication cache ensures each skill loads at most once per session, preventing context pollution from redundant invocations. Skills are discovered from three tiers with strict priority ordering: project-local ( .opendev/skills/ , highest priority) for repository-specific conventions, user-global ( ˜/.opendev/skills/ ) for personal preferences across all projects, and built-in (shipped with the package, lowest priority) for default expertise. When two skills share the same name, the higher-priority source takes precedence, enabling project-specific overrides of default behavior. 

Batch execution via batch_tool . Enables multiple tool calls in a single agent turn, reducing round-trip overhead. The agent specifies the execution mode: parallel (thread pool with max 5 concurrent workers) for independent operations like reading multiple files or running multiple searches, or serial for dependent operations like creating a directory then writing a file into it. The agent specifies the mode because only it knows the dependency relationships from context, as the system cannot reliably infer whether operations are independent. Automatic dependency detection was attempted but proved unreliable; explicit agent-specified mode delegating the decision to the entity with full context knowledge solved this cleanly. 

Design evolution. The initial design had no batch execution; every tool required a full LLM round-trip, and multiple file reads took multiple turns. Skills were originally loaded at startup, consuming context on expertise never used in the session. Subagents initially ran sequentially, even when tasks were independent. The current architecture addresses all three issues: batch execution eliminates unnecessary round-trips, two-phase skill loading reduces baseline overhead to a compact metadata index, and automatic parallelization of subagent calls exploits task independence without requiring the agent to manage concurrency explicitly. The tools above produce artifacts and side effects; the persistence layer ensures these survive across sessions and provides rollback when the agent makes mistakes. 

2.5 Persistence Layer 

The persistence layer stores conversation histories, configuration, model metadata, and file-operation logs using ordinary files on disk: JSON for structured data, JSONL (one JSON object per line) for append-heavy streams, and plain text where simplicity matters. No external database is required. All persistent state lives under two root directories. User-global state (settings, caches, installed plugins) goes to ~/.opendev/ . Project-scoped state (session transcripts, project-specific settings) goes to a subdirectory derived from the project path: ~/.opendev/projects/{encoded-path}/ , where the project’s absolute path is encoded by replacing path separators with dashes (e.g., /Users/alice/myapp becomes -Users-alice-myapp ). This separation ensures that conversations about one repository never appear alongside conversations about another, and that project-specific settings do not leak across unrelated codebases. 

2.5.1 Session Storage 

Each conversation is stored as two files: a .json metadata file and a .jsonl transcript file. The metadata file records the session identifier, creation and last-activity timestamps, working directory, title, and summary, but contains no messages. The transcript file stores the actual messages, one per line, each serialized as a JSON object with role, content, timestamp, tool calls, and token counts. Splitting metadata from messages 39 means that listing all sessions (to show the user a session picker) requires reading only the small metadata files rather than loading potentially large transcript histories. 

Writing sessions safely. Sessions are saved through a write flow designed to prevent data loss even under concurrent access. Before writing, the system acquires an exclusive file lock ( fcntl.flock ) on the metadata file with a 10-second timeout to prevent deadlocks. The metadata is then written to a temporary file and atomically renamed into place using os.rename() , which on POSIX systems guarantees that the file is either fully written or untouched, never half-written. The transcript file follows the same locking protocol. After both files are updated, the session index is also updated atomically. 

Auto-save. Rather than requiring explicit save commands, the system auto-saves the conversation every 5 turns (configurable via auto_save_interval ). Each auto-save writes both the metadata and the full transcript. Between auto-saves, messages exist only in memory. For multi-channel deployments (such as a web interface), a separate append-only path writes each new message individually to the transcript file under an exclusive lock, providing immediate durability at the cost of one file-system call per message. 

Session index. Listing sessions by scanning every metadata file in the project directory is slow when many sessions accumulate. A lightweight index file ( sessions-index.json ) caches the essential fields (session ID, title, message count, last-modified timestamp) at roughly 200 bytes per entry, enabling instant session listing. The index is updated atomically whenever a session is saved. If the index file is missing, corrupted, or has a permission error, the system rebuilds it automatically by scanning all metadata files in the directory, creating entries for each valid session and deleting empty ones. This self-healing behavior means the index never becomes a single point of failure: even if the file is accidentally deleted or corrupted, the next list_sessions 

call regenerates it transparently. 

Session titles and resumption. When a new session is first saved, it has no meaningful title. A lightweight topic-detection model generates a short title (capped at 50 characters) by examining the last 4 messages. This runs on a background daemon thread so that it never blocks the main conversation loop. When the user starts the agent in a project directory without specifying a session, the system defaults to the most recent session for that project, enabling a “continue where I left off” workflow. Sessions from nested subprojects do not appear in the parent project’s list because each project root produces a distinct encoded path. 

Session cost metadata. Each session’s metadata file includes a cost_tracking object that records cumu-lative API usage: total input tokens, total output tokens, total cost in USD (computed from model pricing metadata), and the number of API calls. This metadata is updated after every LLM call and persisted with the session. When the user resumes a session via --continue , the CostTracker service restores its state from this metadata, ensuring that the running cost display reflects the full session history rather than only the current invocation. 

Legacy migration. Earlier versions stored messages inline in the metadata JSON file rather than in a separate JSONL transcript. When the system encounters a session with inline messages and no JSONL file, it automatically migrates the messages to a new JSONL file, clears the inline messages from the metadata, and saves a backup of the original file. This one-time migration is transparent to the user. 

2.5.2 Operation Log and Undo 

Agents make mistakes: they write to the wrong file, make an edit that breaks something, or delete a file the user did not intend to remove. Rather than requiring users to manually undo these changes with version control commands, O PEN DEV tracks every file operation (create, modify, delete) in a log and provides a single-command undo. Each operation record contains the operation type, file path, timestamp, a unique identifier, and the file’s content before the operation. These records are stored in two places: an in-memory list for fast undo during the current session, and a JSONL file ( operations.jsonl ) in the session directory for durability. The JSONL 40 log is best-effort: if writing to it fails (for example, due to a permission issue), the failure is logged but does not interrupt the agent’s work. The in-memory list is the primary data source for undo operations. When the user invokes undo, the system pops the most recent operation from the in-memory list and reverses it: created files are deleted, modified files are reverted to their backed-up content, and deleted files are restored from the saved copy. The in-memory history is capped at 50 operations to prevent unbounded memory growth. When the cap is reached, the oldest entries are evicted first. In practice, users rarely need to undo operations older than the last dozen or so, so this bound has not been a limitation. The undo system works alongside version control rather than replacing it. It handles uncommitted changes without requiring the user to know git, and provides lower friction than typing git restore for quick corrections after agent mistakes. 

Shadow git snapshots. The in-memory undo log tracks only file operations performed through the agent’s tools. It cannot capture side effects from shell commands (e.g., npm install modifying package-lock.json )or build processes. For comprehensive per-step undo, the system maintains a shadow git repository , a bare repository at ~/.opendev/snapshot/<project-id>/ that shares no history with the user’s actual repository. At every agent step that modifies files, the snapshot system runs git add . && git write-tree against the project working directory using the shadow repository’s object store, recording a tree hash in the session metadata. The /undo command computes a git diff between the current tree and the snapshot tree, identifies changed files, and restores them via git checkout <hash> -- <file> . The shadow repository’s 

.gitignore is synchronized from the real repository to avoid tracking build artifacts. A scheduled cleanup (git gc --prune=7.days ) keeps the shadow repository compact. This approach leverages git’s content-addressable storage for perfect file-level restoration without interfering with the user’s version control workflow. 

2.5.3 Configuration 

Configuration follows a four-tier hierarchy designed so that users get reasonable behavior out of the box but can customize anything at the right scope: 1. Built-in defaults provide a working configuration without any user setup (default model, temperature, auto-save interval, and so on). 2. Environment variables supply API credentials and CI/CD-specific overrides. API keys are only loaded from environment variables, never from configuration files, to prevent accidental exposure in version control. If a key is found in a configuration file, it is automatically stripped during loading. 3. User-global settings (~/.opendev/settings.json ) store cross-project preferences such as the user’s pre-ferred model, UI settings, and tool auto-approval rules. 4. Project-local settings (<project>/.opendev/settings.json ) store repository-specific overrides, such as a different model for a particular codebase or project-specific coding standards. Each tier overrides the one above it: project settings take precedence over user-global settings, which take precedence over environment variables, which take precedence over built-in defaults. The configuration is loaded once at startup and cached in memory; subsequent reads return the cached value without re-reading files. Context window limits are derived automatically from model capabilities rather than requiring explicit configuration. When the user selects a model, the system looks up its maximum context length from the provider cache (described below) and sets the token budget accordingly. This avoids a common source of misconfiguration where users set a context limit that does not match their model’s actual capacity. 41 2.5.4 Provider and Model Cache 

The system needs to know what models are available from each provider, along with their capabilities (context length, vision support, pricing). Rather than hardcoding this information, O PEN DEV fetches it from an external catalog API and caches the results locally under ~/.opendev/cache/ .The cache uses a stale-while-revalidate strategy with a 24-hour time-to-live. On startup, the system checks when the cache was last refreshed by examining the modification time of a .last_sync marker file. If the cache is less than 24 hours old, it is used as-is. If it is stale or missing, the system fetches fresh data from the API, transforms it into per-provider JSON files (one file per provider, containing model names, context lengths, capabilities, and pricing), and updates the marker. If the network fetch fails, the system falls back to the stale cache if one exists, or proceeds without capability information if no cache is available at all. This ensures that the agent can start even when offline: the cache file from the last successful sync provides enough information to operate normally. Environment overrides ( OPENDEV_MODELS_DEV_PATH for a local catalog file, OPENDEV_DISABLE_REMOTE_MODELS 

to skip network entirely) allow the cache to be populated without network access, which is useful in air-gapped environments or for testing with a fixed model set. The architecture described above embodies numerous design decisions whose rationale is not always self-evident from the component descriptions alone. The next section steps back from per-component detail to examine the cross-cutting design tensions (context pressure, behavioral steering, safety enforcement, LLM imprecision, and resource bounding) that shaped these choices and extracts transferable lessons for builders of similar systems. 

## 3 Discussion 

The preceding sections describe the architecture and tool ecosystem of O PEN DEV in detail. Here we step back from per-component descriptions and examine five cross-cutting design tensions that shaped the system. Each subsection synthesizes insights that span multiple components and extracts transferable lessons for builders of similar agentic systems. 

3.1 Context Pressure as the Central Design Constraint 

Unlike CPU or memory, context is consumed by both the system (prompts, tool schemas, safety preambles) and the agent’s own actions (tool outputs, conversation history). Every capability added to the system prompt and every tool result returned to the agent competes for the same finite budget. In our experience, tool outputs (file contents, command results, search hits) consume 70–80% of the context in a typical session, dwarfing the system prompt and the agent’s own reasoning. This makes context utilization the single most important metric for agent longevity, and it imposes a pervasive tension: richer tool outputs improve per-turn accuracy but shorten the session’s useful life.   

> Lesson: Treat context as a budget, not a buffer
> Context reduction is not a binary operation. A graduated approach (monitoring utilization continuously, pruning stale tool outputs before they become irrelevant, masking old observations, and reserving LLM-based summa-rization for genuine overflow) dramatically outperforms the naive strategy of compacting everything once a hard limit is reached. The fast pruning pass described in Section 2.3.6 exemplifies this: by walking backwards through tool results and replacing outputs beyond the agent’s working horizon with a [pruned] marker, it often reclaims enough space to avoid expensive LLM compaction entirely. Design graduated reduction stages rather than a single emergency compaction.

42 Lesson: Offload large outputs to the filesystem 

When a tool produces output exceeding a size threshold, writing the full content to a scratch file and returning only a short preview plus a file reference keeps the context focused on what the agent is actively using (Section 2.3.2). The agent sees enough to decide whether the full output matters, and can read it on demand. This transforms a context-consumption problem into a retrieval problem, which is strictly cheaper: retrieval costs one tool call, while context consumption is paid on every subsequent LLM invocation for the rest of the session. 

Prompt structure for caching. For providers that support prompt caching, splitting the system prompt into a stable prefix and a dynamic suffix, marking the prefix with a cache control header, yields significant input cost savings over a multi-turn session (Section 2.3.1). Since the system prompt is re-sent on every LLM call, caching the stable portion amortizes the cost of the system’s richest instructions. 

Dual-memory for thinking contexts. When providing conversation context to a thinking model, separating compressed long-range context (an LLM summary of the full history) from detailed short-range context (the last several exchanges verbatim) keeps the thinking budget bounded regardless of conversation length while preserving both strategic goals and operational details (Section 2.3.3). A subtlety: iteratively summarizing a summary accumulates distortion over multiple rounds. Periodically regenerating the summary from the full conversation history, rather than compressing the previous summary, corrects this drift. 

Lesson: Calibrate from API-reported token counts, not local estimates 

Using the API’s reported prompt_tokens from the previous call as the calibration anchor is essential for accurate context management. Providers inject invisible content (safety preambles, tool schema serializations, internal for-matting) that makes local token counting systematically underestimate actual usage. In our system, the discrepancy was large enough to cause compaction to trigger too late, leading to context overflow errors (Section 2.3.7). Always treat the provider’s reported token count as ground truth; local estimates are useful only as a fallback when no prior API response is available. 

3.2 Steering Behavior Over Long Horizons 

System prompt influence decays as conversations grow. Instructions that reliably govern the agent’s first few turns are routinely violated after 30 or more tool calls, when the instruction is far from the model’s attention window and buried under dozens of tool results. Behavioral guidance is therefore a signal-to-noise engineering problem: how to maintain compliance without drowning the context in repeated directives. 

Lesson: Inject reminders at the point of decision, not upfront 

Short, targeted reminders at maximum recency are more effective than long system prompt sections that the model has partially forgotten after 20 turns. Crucially, these reminders should use role: user rather than role: system :in our experiments, user-role reminders consistently produced stronger compliance, likely because the model assigns higher salience to recent user messages than to system context that has been pushed down by intervening turns (Section 2.3.4). However, reminder frequency must be capped per type; a reminder injected on every turn becomes background noise that the model learns to ignore, paradoxically reducing compliance. 

Lesson: Separate thinking from action 

When tools are available, LLMs tend to act quickly rather than think deeply. Providing a separate thinking phase with no tool access produces substantially better reasoning traces, because the model is not pressured by the availability of action (Section 2.2.6). This separation is more effective than asking the model to “think carefully” in the same call where tools are available. The mechanism matters: it is the absence of tool schemas from the API call, not an instruction to refrain from using them, that changes the model’s behavior. 

Explicit decision trees for tool selection. Agents default to text search (grep) for nearly every lookup, even when a more precise tool exists. This wastes iterations and floods the context with false positives. Encoding a retrieval-tool decision tree directly into the agent’s prompt (routing symbol names to semantic search, 43 string patterns to text search, structural patterns to AST search, and file-name conventions to glob) reduced unnecessary grep calls and improved first-attempt retrieval accuracy. The key is that the decision criteria must be concrete and anchored to observable features of the query (“if the target is a function or class name, use find_symbol ”), not abstract (“use the most appropriate tool”). 

Provider-conditional prompt sections. Different LLM providers have meaningfully different capabilities: extended thinking, function calling conventions, context limits. Rather than cluttering the system prompt with provider-agnostic instructions, registering provider-specific sections that load only when the corre-sponding provider is active keeps the prompt budget focused (Section 2.3.1). Unknown providers receive no section; graceful degradation is better than incorrect guidance. 

> Lesson: Separate agent construction from agent execution
> Long-running agents benefit from a clean separation between scaffolding (pre-runtime assembly) and the harness (runtime orchestration). Scaffolding (constructing the system prompt, building tool schemas, registering subagents) runs once before the first prompt and produces a fully initialized agent. The harness then wraps the reasoning loop with tool dispatch, context management, safety enforcement, and session persistence (Section 2.2). This separation prevents construction-time concerns from tangling with runtime concerns: the harness never checks whether the agent is fully initialized, because eager construction guarantees it always is (Section 2.2.1). The practical benefit is that each concern can evolve independently: adding a new tool requires only a registry change at construction time, while changing the compaction strategy requires only a harness change at runtime.

3.3 Safety Through Architectural Constraints 

Runtime permission checks are the wrong primary abstraction for agent safety. A model that sees a dangerous tool in its schema can reason about invoking it, argue for why it should be allowed, and probe for edge cases in the permission logic. The more robust approach is to make violations structurally impossible: if write tools are absent from the agent’s schema, the agent cannot attempt writes because it never sees a way to invoke them (Section 2.2). This is the difference between a guard rail and a missing road: the model cannot reason about capabilities it does not know exist.   

> Lesson: Make unsafe tools invisible, not blocked
> Schema gating (removing tools from the agent’s available set rather than checking permissions at call time) is fundamentally more robust than runtime permission checks. When a tool is absent from the schema, the agent cannot attempt to invoke it, argue for an exception, or probe for bypass conditions. Defense-in-depth with independently designed layers ensures that no single bypass compromises safety: schema gating prevents unauthorized attempts, the approval system intercepts operations requiring human review, file freshness validation prevents overwriting concurrent edits, and shadow git snapshots (Section 2.5.2) make all filesystem changes reversible. These layers are deliberately independent; a bug in one does not weaken another.

Approval persistence prevents fatigue. When a user marks an approval rule as “always allow,” persisting it to disk so it survives session restarts is critical. Without persistence, users must re-approve the same operations every session, causing approval fatigue that leads to blanket auto-approval, defeating the safety system entirely. 

Lifecycle hooks as extensibility. External scripts that observe or intercept agent lifecycle events enable custom policies, logging, CI integration, and security enforcement without modifying agent code. The hook interface must be designed early: blocking vs. non-blocking semantics, input mutation support, and merged global/project-level configurations are all necessary for hooks to be useful rather than decorative. 

Modal priority during interrupt. When the user presses an interrupt key while a modal dialog (approval prompt, user question) is active, the system should cancel the dialog rather than interrupting the agent. Interrupting the agent while a dialog is pending creates orphaned UI state (dangling spinners, stale futures, unresolved promises) that requires manual cleanup. 44 3.4 Designing for Approximate Outputs 

LLMs reliably produce approximately-correct outputs. Edit targets drift from actual file content: trailing whitespace, indentation differences, escape sequence variations. Recovery strategies reference tools the agent does not have. Search queries route to suboptimal tools. A system that demands exact correctness from the model will spend most of its time in error-recovery loops. The alternative is to design tools and interfaces that absorb LLM imprecision as a first-class property.   

> Lesson: Design tools to absorb LLM imprecision
> The edit operation is the clearest example. A strict exact-match edit tool causes the majority of agent errors in practice, not because the agent’s intent is wrong, but because its reproduction of the target text is slightly off. Building a chain of progressively relaxed matchers, where each returns the actual substring found in the file to preserve original formatting, converts these near-misses into successful edits (Section 2.4.2). The chain short-circuits on first match, so exact matches incur zero overhead. The general principle: when the agent’s intent is unambiguous but its literal output is imprecise, the tool should bridge the gap rather than reject the attempt.
> Lesson: Adapt recovery hints to the agent’s available tool set
> When truncating large output and suggesting recovery strategies, the system must check which tools the agent actually has (Section 2.3.2). If the agent can delegate to a subagent, suggest that; if it cannot (because it is itself a subagent), suggest incremental processing with offset/limit parameters. Generic hints that recommend unavailable tools cause the agent to attempt impossible actions and enter error loops. The same principle applies to error messages: “re-read the file and retry your edit with current content” is vastly more actionable than “try again,” so classifying errors into specific categories and retrieving targeted recovery templates for each improves recovery rates (Section 2.3.5).

Auto-promoting server-like commands. Development servers, build watchers, and test suites that run indefinitely will hit any foreground timeout. Detecting server-like commands via regex patterns and automatically promoting them to background execution with output capture prevents the agent from blocking on a process that was never meant to terminate (Section 2.4.3). 

Auto-installing missing dependencies. Tools that depend on external runtimes should auto-install the dependency on first use rather than failing with an opaque error. Check for the dependency, install if missing, and retry. This eliminates a common class of setup-related failures that confuse both the agent and the user, and is another instance of designing tools to absorb environmental imprecision. 

3.5 Lazy Loading and Bounded Growth 

Eager loading fails at scale. Loading all MCP tool schemas at startup consumed 40% of the context budget before the agent processed its first user message. Loading all skill definitions populated the prompt with content the agent would never use in most sessions. The solution in both cases is lazy discovery: load metadata indexes at startup, defer full content to the point of use (Section 2.4.7). For MCP tools, lazy discovery reduces the startup context cost from 40% to under 5%. The agent receives a compact summary of available servers and their capabilities; full tool schemas are loaded only when the agent selects a server for a specific task. For skills, a two-phase approach serves the same purpose: a metadata index (name, description, trigger conditions) is loaded at startup, while the full skill content (which may include multi-page prompt templates) is loaded only when the agent decides to invoke the skill. External metadata (model capabilities, pricing, context limits) benefits from a stale-while-revalidate caching strategy (Section 2.5.4): on startup, serve from cache if fresh; if stale, serve the stale data and refresh in the background; if the refresh fails, continue with stale data. This guarantees offline startup and eliminates “cannot connect” failures that block the entire system. 45 Lesson: Bound every resource that grows with session length 

> Unbounded resources fail in long sessions. Without explicit caps, undo history accumulates snapshots indefinitely, concurrent tool calls can overwhelm the system, and behavioral nudges can flood the context. The design rule is simple: every resource that grows with session length must have a cap. Iteration limits prevent runaway agent loops. Undo history is bounded to a fixed number of snapshots. Concurrent tool calls are capped to prevent resource exhaustion. Nudge budgets limit how many times each reminder type can fire. Read-only tool calls run in parallel while write calls serialize (Section 2.2.3).
> Lesson: Prefer empirical threshold tuning over first-principles calculation
> The specific values for caps (context pressure thresholds, pruning protection windows, reminder frequencies, iteration limits) resist first-principles calculation. They depend on the interaction between model behavior, typical user workflows, and system overhead in ways that are difficult to predict. Starting with conservative values and tuning based on observed failure modes (sessions that compact too early, reminders that fire too often, loops that run too long) is more effective than attempting to derive optimal values analytically. In our system, the 70% compaction trigger, 3 nudge attempts, and 6 thinking depth levels all emerged from iterative failure analysis.

Self-healing indexes. Caching frequently-accessed metadata in a lightweight index file enables fast listing without scanning underlying data files (Section 2.5.1). If the index is missing or corrupted, automatically rebuilding it from the underlying data makes the index a performance optimization rather than a single point of failure. The same principle applies to any derived data structure: design it so that loss triggers regeneration, not failure. 

Deterministic operations outside the agent loop. Not everything needs to go through the agent. Session management, mode switching, model selection, and server configuration are deterministic operations that should be handled directly at the input boundary (via slash-prefix dispatch or equivalent) with no approval gates, no undo tracking, and no token cost (Section 2.2.4). Routing these through the LLM wastes context and introduces unnecessary nondeterminism. These five design tensions (context as a budget, behavioral steering over long horizons, safety through architectural constraints, designing for approximate outputs, and bounding unbounded growth) are not unique to O PEN DEV . They reflect fundamental challenges in building any long-running agentic system. The following section surveys how the broader research community has approached these same challenges, positioning O PEN DEV ’s design decisions within the evolving landscape of code intelligence, autonomous software engineering, and context engineering. 

## 4 Related Work 

The development of terminal-centric AI coding agents draws upon a rich and rapidly evolving body of work spanning code intelligence, autonomous software engineering, and interactive agent design. In this section, we survey the key research streams that inform our system design and contextualize O PEN DEV within the broader landscape. 

4.1 Code Generation and Code LLMs 

The application of LLMs to programming has progressed from function-level generation, benchmarked by HumanEval [ 15 ] and MBPP [ 7 ], through class-level tasks such as ClassEval [ 23 ], to repository-level challenges that demand cross-file planning and multi-step reasoning [ 44 ]. Specialized code LLMs including DeepSeek-Coder [ 31 ], StarCoder [ 45 ], CodeLlama [ 69 ], and CodeT5+ [ 84 ] have driven this progression, supported by unified toolkits such as CodeTF [ 11 ] that standardize training and inference across models, while Retrieval-Augmented Generation [ 41 ] and reinforcement learning address the gap between isolated generation and realistic repository-scale tasks [ 44 ]. O PEN DEV builds on this foundation by embedding code 46 LLMs within an agentic loop that provides the navigation, editing, and execution capabilities necessary to apply generated code in real repositories. 

4.2 Autonomous Issue Resolution 

SWE-bench [ 37 ] defined the task of autonomous issue resolution, catalyzing a research frontier that spans single-agent, multi-agent, and workflow-based approaches [ 43 ]. Single-agent frameworks such as SWE-Agent [ 91 ] pioneered autonomous file navigation and code editing, while AutoCodeRover [ 105 ] and HyperA-gent [ 66 ] extended this to iterative refinement and generalist task solving. Multi-agent systems distribute the problem across specialized roles: MAGIS [ 75 ] assigns role-playing collaboration, CodeR [ 14 ] introduces task-graph execution, and platforms such as OpenHands [ 81 ] orchestrate heterogeneous agents through ensemble selection [ 43 ]. Workflow-based approaches like Agentless [ 86 ] enforce structured pipelines (localization, repair, validation) for improved reproducibility. Beyond architectural choices, the community has explored both training-based and inference-time methods to improve agent capabilities. Supervised fine-tuning with curriculum learning [ 88 ] and synthetic data [ 65 ], combined with RL algorithms leveraging process-oriented rewards [ 50 ], equip models with stronger issue-resolution skills. At inference time, Monte Carlo Tree Search [ 109 ] enables flexible backtracking over repair trajectories, while parallel exploration strategies such as CodeMonkeys [ 83 ] maximize solution coverage [ 43 ]. OPEN DEV draws on these advances, combining single-agent autonomy with structured subagent delegation and workflow-based safety enforcement. Across these paradigms, agents increasingly rely on code itself as their primary medium of reasoning and action. 

4.3 Code as a Core Medium for Generalist Agents 

Recent work has highlighted a paradigm shift from pure natural language reasoning to code-driven agent interactions [ 44 ]. Using code as a universal medium gives agents precise tool invocation, reproducible state management, and composable action primitives. 

Interaction protocols. Standardized tool-use patterns such as ReAct [96] and ReWOO [89] enable precise tool invocation and state management. The Model Context Protocol (MCP) [ 2] introduces structured message formats for reliable multi-turn tool orchestration, while multi-agent coordination schemes such as Agent-to-Agent (A2A) enable direct inter-agent communication [44]. 

Thinking and acting in code. Reasoning methods such as Program-Aided Language Models (PAL) [ 26 ], Program-of-Thoughts [ 44 ], and Chain-of-Code [ 44 ] enable LLMs to generate and execute code for structured reasoning. Action execution frameworks translate plans into runnable code: CodeAct [ 80 ] enables interactive operations through executable Python, TaskWeaver [ 68 ] converts requests into plugin-based function calls, and CodeAgents [ 74 ] provides additional orchestration patterns. Domain applications extend this paradigm beyond software engineering, from healthcare (EHRAgent [33]) to robotic control (Code as Policies [49]). 

Memory with code. Code-based storage strategies have proven effective for managing LLM context con-straints. Voyager [ 78 ] stores validated skills as executable code for later reuse, while Reasoning Bank [ 51 ]enables rule-based learning from repair trajectories. MemGPT [ 63 ] and ExpeRepair [ 103 ] introduce hier-archical and dual-memory architectures for context management, both discussed further in the context engineering subsection below. By operating within terminal environments and embracing execution feedback through shell commands, OpenDev directly aligns with the “Acting in Code” philosophy, leveraging the shell as a universal interpreter to orchestrate complex, multi-step workflows. 47 4.4 Agentic Software Engineering Workflows 

Agentic Software Engineering formalizes the workflows through which human engineers and LLMs collabo-rate on software tasks. 

Iterative and prompt-driven workflows. The Plan–Do–Assess–Review (PDAR) loop formalizes a single task’s lifecycle: planning through Product Requirement Prompts (PRPs), implementation by a dev-agent, self-assessment, and human review [ 1]. CLI toolkits such as SuperClaude template these loops for consistency and convenience, but stop short of a team-level methodology [1]. 

Multi-agent and agile-inspired frameworks. BMAD organizes agents into agile roles (Product Owner, Architect, Developer, Tester), with PRDs and story files enabling parallel execution [ 1]. A crucial delineation proposes separating workspaces into an Agent Command Environment (ACE) for human supervision and orchestration, and an Agent Execution Environment (AEE) for scalable agent operations [1]. 

Mentorship and lifecycle management. SASE introduces the concept of Mentorship-as-Code, where review feedback becomes version-controlled, testable MentorScript rules, enabling cumulative improvement across tasks. Agent lifecycle management shifts agents from stateless contractors to persistent teammates with memory, observability, and secure execution [1]. OPEN DEV embodies the characteristics of an execution-focused terminal hub, bridging iterative develop-ment cycles natively via command-line interactivity and treating command outputs as direct signals for autonomous debugging and loop refinement. 

4.5 Agent Tool Systems and Modular Components 

In training-free frameworks, LLMs rely on specialized tools to augment reasoning without fine-tuning. These tools are organized along the repair pipeline: bug reproduction, fault localization, code search, patch generation, validation, and test generation [43]. Bug reproduction tools like AEGIS [ 48 ] provide automated environment setup and reproduction workflows, ensuring consistent execution contexts. Fault localization tools include Spectrum-Based Fault Localization (SBFL) and graph-based methods that construct code dependency graphs [ 43 ]. Code search tools range from interactive retrieval using BM25 and AST-based APIs to graph-based understanding via Knowledge Graphs and Language Server Protocols [ 43 , 55 ]. Patch generation tools employ robust editing formats (e.g., AutoDiff) and ensemble selection through regression testing [ 43 ]. SpecRover [ 16 ] uses specification-guided search for high-quality patches. Test generation tools such as Otter [ 106 ] and Issue2Test [ 79 ] use feedback-driven mechanisms to synthesize failing tests that reproduce reported defects [43]. OPEN DEV adopts a registry-based tool architecture with lazy discovery, hierarchical skill templates, and defense-in-depth safety mechanisms, balancing comprehensive capability with token efficiency. 

4.6 Context Engineering for Long-Horizon Agents 

Context management is a fundamental challenge for long-running agent systems. Issue resolution tasks often require long-horizon, multi-turn interaction that raises both API cost and performance degradation from context rot [43]. 

Formal foundations and taxonomy. Mei et al. [ 53 ] provide the first comprehensive survey of con-text engineering (CE) for LLMs, formalizing the context supplied to a model as a structured tuple 

C = A(cinstr , cknow , ctools , cmem , cstate , cquery ), where A is an assembly function that orchestrates instruc-tional context, external knowledge, tool schemas, memory, execution state, and the user query. The survey organizes the field around three pillars: context retrieval (selecting relevant information from external sources), 

context processing (transforming, compressing, or restructuring retrieved content), and context management 

48 (maintaining coherence and relevance across turns). O PEN DEV ’s architecture maps directly onto this tax-onomy: its prompt composer assembles cinstr from modular markdown sections, the tool registry manages 

ctools with lazy MCP discovery, the memory pipeline maintains cmem , and adaptive compaction handles 

cstate across long sessions. 

Historical and theoretical perspective. Hua et al. [ 36 ] situate context engineering within a broader intellec-tual history, tracing four eras of development: early prompt engineering focused on single-turn instruction, retrieval-augmented generation that introduced external knowledge, tool-augmented agents that expanded the action space, and the current CE 2.0 era that treats context as a first-class engineering concern. Drawing on Dey’s formal definition of context from ubiquitous computing and Weiser’s vision of calm technology, they articulate three guiding principles: entropy reduction (each context element should reduce uncertainty about the desired output), minimal sufficiency (include only what is necessary to avoid attention dilution), and semantic continuity (context should evolve coherently across turns rather than being reconstructed from scratch). They also identify a narrowness gap in current systems, which overwhelmingly focus on chat history management while neglecting holistic context dimensions such as tool state, environmental signals, and cross-session knowledge. O PEN DEV ’s system reminders, which inject event-driven context at attention-critical positions, directly address the semantic continuity principle, while its staged compaction implements entropy reduction by progressively summarizing low-value history. 

Context processing and compression techniques. The survey literature documents substantial quan-titative gains from structured context processing [ 53 ]. Chain-of-thought variants (tree-of-thought [ 95 ], graph-of-thought [ 9 ]) improve multi-step reasoning by structuring intermediate context, while compression methods reduce token costs without proportional quality loss: the In-context Autoencoder [ 28 ] achieves 4× compression, and PREMISE reduces prompt length by 87.5% while preserving task performance. On the retrieval side, Self-RAG [ 6] introduces self-reflective retrieval that adaptively decides when to retrieve and critiques its own outputs, RAPTOR [ 70 ] builds recursive tree-structured summaries for hierarchical retrieval, and GraphRAG leverages knowledge graph structures (e.g., HippoRAG [ 32 ]) to improve retrieval precision for complex queries. These advances reveal a fundamental asymmetry: LLMs are more robust to compressed context during understanding tasks than during generation tasks, suggesting that aggressive compression is most viable for context that informs reasoning rather than context that directly shapes output text. O PEN DEV ’s compaction strategy exploits this asymmetry by aggressively summarizing tool outputs and historical turns (understanding context) while preserving system instructions and recent user messages (generation context) verbatim. 

Meta-level context optimization. Ye et al. [ 98 ] introduce Meta Context Engineering (MCE), a framework that treats context engineering itself as an optimization problem rather than a manual design task. They formalize the agent’s context as a bi-level optimization: the outer loop searches over context configurations (system prompts, tool schemas, memory strategies) while the inner loop evaluates agent performance on downstream tasks. A key insight is that fixed evaluation harnesses introduce systematic bias into agent benchmarks, as the harness itself shapes the context in ways that may advantage certain strategies over others. MCE addresses this by co-evolving the agent’s context and evaluation setup using a (1+1)-ES with crossover, an evolutionary strategy that mutates and recombines context configurations. On SWE-bench Verified, MCE achieves 89.1% resolve rate compared to 70.7% for the hand-engineered baseline, while also being 13.6 ×

faster due to more efficient context utilization. The optimized configurations transfer across tasks, suggesting that meta-learned context strategies capture general principles rather than task-specific artifacts. This line of work implies that hand-designed context engineering, including the strategies employed by O PEN DEV ,could eventually be complemented or replaced by learned optimization of context assembly. Memory integration empowers agents to transcend isolated problem-solving by accumulating historical context. Approaches range from hierarchical storage separating general knowledge from repository-specific details [ 43 ], to cognitive architectures that partition knowledge into episodic, semantic, and procedural stores [ 35 , 53 , 108 ]. Building on the memory primitives discussed above (MemGPT’s virtual paging [ 63 ], ExpeRepair’s dual-memory [ 103 ]), more recent work explores population-level memory: agent variant pop-49 ulations [ 17 ] maintain diverse exploration histories for robust decision-making, while experience banks [ 82 ]guide search through accumulated knowledge. Current frontiers prioritize distilling transferable reasoning strategies, shifting from storing raw data to abstracting high-level policies from trajectories [43]. Memory-driven scaling approaches complement the inference-time strategies discussed above by integrating persistent context to reduce redundant exploration, enabling agents to build on past attempts rather than starting fresh. Context compression for long-horizon agents has seen notable advances: ACON [ 38 ] optimizes compression policies for extended agent sessions, while Context-Folding [ 73 ] scales agent capabilities through recursive context summarization. At the frontier, Agentic Context Engineering [ 104 ] enables models to evolve their own contexts through self-improvement loops. Multi-agent communication has matured through a progression of standardized protocols, from early knowledge-sharing languages (KQML, FIPA ACL) to modern interoperability standards including MCP [ 2 ] for tool integration, Agent-to-Agent (A2A) for direct inter-agent messaging, and Agent Communication Protocol (ACP) for structured multi-agent coordination [ 53 ]. O PEN DEV addresses these challenges through automatic compaction that preserves critical information while summarizing history, combined with dual-memory architecture and template-based error recovery. Young [ 99 ] formalizes the notion of an agent harness as the runtime framework that coordinates these concerns (tool dispatch, context lifecycle, progress tracking, and clean handoffs between context windows) for agents operating over extended timeframes. 

4.7 Benchmarks for Evaluating Agentic Coding Systems 

Having introduced foundational code generation benchmarks above, we focus here on the evaluation ecosystem around agentic systems. The scope of benchmarks has progressively widened: from function- and class-level generation (APPS [ 34 ], CodeContests [ 47 ]), through repository-level issue resolution anchored by SWE-bench [ 37 ] and its variants (SWE-bench Verified [ 61 ], Multi-SWE-bench [ 101 ], SWE-bench Mul-timodal [ 93 ], SWE-bench Pro [ 21 ], SWE-Lancer [ 56 ]), to environment-grounded interaction tasks such as WebArena [ 110 ], OSWorld [ 87 ], and EnvBench [ 24 ]. Complementary benchmarks target specific dimensions: SWT-Bench [ 57 ] for testing workflows, FEA-Bench [ 46 ] for feature implementation, NL2Repo-Bench [ 22 ] for repository generation, DevEval [ 42 ] for the full development lifecycle, and SWE-EVO [ 76 ] for long-horizon software evolution. Specialized benchmarks evaluate capabilities beyond general code editing. τ-Bench [ 94 ] and the Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard [ 64 ] assess tool-use and function-calling proficiency. In scientific and ML engineering, ReplicationBench [ 97 ] targets research replication, MLGym [ 58 ] and MLE-Bench [ 12 ] evaluate ML research and engineering tasks, and CORE-Bench [ 72 ] measures computational reproducibility. For long-horizon terminal interaction, Terminal-Bench [ 54 ] demonstrates that frontier agents resolve fewer than 65% of curated CLI tasks, while LongCLI-Bench [ 25 ] finds pass rates below 20% for multi-category programming tasks spanning development, feature addition, bug fixing, and refactoring. 

4.8 Evaluation Methodology and Best Practices 

Rigorous evaluation of agentic systems requires careful benchmark design beyond simple accuracy met-rics. The Agentic Benchmark Checklist [ 111 , 112 ] formalizes best practices including clear task definition, reproducibility guarantees, contamination prevention, and efficiency-aware metrics. LLM-as-Judge ap-proaches such as MT-Bench [ 107 ] enable scalable quality assessment when traditional metrics fail to capture semantic correctness, though data contamination remains a critical concern requiring continuous benchmark renewal [ 20 , 90 ]. Efficiency metrics (API costs, inference time, and token consumption [ 52 ]) and long-task completion measurement [ 39 , 40 ] provide holistic assessment of agent practicality for real-world deployment. 

4.9 Human–Agent Collaboration 

LongCLI-Bench provides compelling evidence that human–agent collaboration significantly improves task completion. Static plan injection, where key plans are provided before execution, outperforms self-correction in both pass rate and efficiency. Dynamic interactive guidance, where agents request human intervention 50 based on their current state, achieves even higher performance. The combined setting yields the best results while reducing the need for human intervention [ 25 ]. These findings strongly indicate that rather than exclusively pursuing full autonomy, future systems should develop collaborative workflows that leverage synergy between efficient agent execution and human strategic guidance. O PEN DEV supports this paradigm through its approval workflows, interactive command execution, and structured feedback loops. The research landscape surveyed above reveals a clear trajectory: from isolated code generation toward integrated, long-horizon agent systems that must balance capability, safety, and context efficiency. The benchmarks increasingly demand sustained multi-step reasoning in realistic environments, while the methods progressively address the engineering challenges (context management, tool orchestration, memory, and safety) that such sustained operation requires. The following section synthesizes the specific future directions that emerge from the intersection of O PEN DEV ’s architectural experience and these broader research trends. 

## 5 Conclusion and Future Directions 

This paper presented O PEN DEV , an open AI-powered command-line agent for software engineering, and documented the architectural decisions, design trade-offs, and lessons learned from building a production-ready system. Key contributions include a compound AI system architecture [ 100 ] with multi-model routing (Section 2.2.5), an extended ReAct pipeline with thinking and critique phases (Section 2.2.6), Adaptive Context Compaction (Section 2.3.6), event-driven system reminders (Section 2.3.4), an experience-driven memory pipeline, lazy tool discovery via MCP (Section 2.4.7), and a dual-interface abstraction. The central architectural insight is that per-workflow LLM binding (Section 2.2.5) yields model-agnosticity: adapting to new models requires only configuration changes, not code changes. Schema-level safety enforcement (Section 2.2) proved more robust than runtime permission checks, as removing write tools from the planning agent’s schema eliminates an entire class of bypass attempts. Conditional prompt composition (Section 2.3.1) reduced overhead by excluding irrelevant instructions while preserving comprehensive guidance when needed. On the context engineering side, managing the finite context window emerged as a first-class engineering concern rather than a secondary optimization. Adaptive Context Compaction (Section 2.3.6), which transitions observations through active, faded, and archived states, reduced peak context consumption by approximately 54% and often eliminated the need for emergency summarization. The three-tier context architecture (static system prompt, dynamic just-in-time reminders (Section 2.3.4), and long-horizon persistence) addressed the attention-decay problem where agents reliably violated instructions after 30+ tool calls. The Agentic Context Engineering memory pipeline enables the agent to learn from tool outcomes within and across sessions without hardcoding strategies into prompts. The cross-cutting design tensions and transferable lessons that emerged from this work are synthesized in Section 3, which examines context pressure as a first-class constraint, behavioral steering over long horizons, safety through architectural enforcement rather than runtime checks, tool design that absorbs LLM imprecision, and resource bounding strategies for long-running sessions. Several capabilities previously identified as future work, such as per-step undo via shadow git snapshots (Section 2.5.2), has been implemented during continued development, demonstrating the extensibility of the layered architecture. Several promising research directions emerge from the challenges identified in this work: 

• Quantitative evaluation on established benchmarks. This paper documents architectural decisions and design rationale but lacks systematic quantitative evaluation. Benchmarking on SWE-bench [ 92 ], Terminal-Bench [ 54 ], and LongCLI-Bench [ 25 ], part of the broader evaluation ecosystem surveyed in Section 4, would validate the architecture against established baselines and identify specific improvement areas. Terminal-Bench’s finding that frontier agents resolve fewer than 65% of tasks, and LongCLI-Bench’s observation that pass rates remain below 20% for long-horizon tasks, suggest substantial room for improvement in context management and multi-step reasoning. 51 • Adaptive resource allocation. Current parameters - the 70% compaction threshold, 3 nudge attempts, 6 thinking depth levels - are globally fixed. Adaptive approaches that dynamically adjust based on task complexity, current context pressure, and error history could optimize the cost–quality–latency triangle per task rather than relying on one-size-fits-all constants. For instance, a simple debugging task should skip the thinking phase entirely, while a complex architectural refactoring may benefit from deeper deliberation and a more conservative compaction strategy. 

• Scaling the memory pipeline. The ACE playbook currently operates per-project with effectiveness scoring and semantic retrieval. Cross-project knowledge transfer - where lessons learned in one repository inform behavior in similar projects - hierarchical bullet organization that separates general programming heuristics from project-specific conventions, and active learning that selectively requests user feedback on uncertain bullets could substantially improve the agent’s ability to accumulate and apply experience over time. 

• Structured code representations for memory. The current memory pipeline stores experience as flat natural-language bullets. Richer representations, such as code dependency graphs that capture relation-ships between modules, call graphs that track function interactions, and project-level ontologies that encode domain concepts, could enable more precise retrieval and reasoning. Combining graph-structured code understanding with long-term persistent memory that spans not just sessions but entire project lifecycles would allow the agent to build deep, evolving models of codebases rather than accumulating isolated observations. 

• Multi-agent coordination beyond hierarchical delegation. Current subagents execute independently under main-agent coordination, communicating only through completion markers. Richer coordination patterns - peer-to-peer communication between subagents, shared blackboard architectures for collabo-rative problem-solving, and negotiation protocols for resolving conflicting tool outcomes - could enable more sophisticated workflows such as concurrent code review and implementation, or parallel exploration with result synthesis. 

• Learned system reminder optimization. The 24-template reminder catalog and its injection timing were manually engineered based on observed failure modes. Automated discovery of effective reminder patterns - through reinforcement learning on attention-decay metrics, learned injection timing based on conversation dynamics, or adaptive template selection conditioned on agent state - could improve nudge effectiveness while reducing the manual engineering burden of designing and maintaining reminder templates. 

• Hybrid CLI–IDE integration. The dual-interface architecture demonstrates that a shared callback protocol can serve fundamentally different frontends. Extending this to IDE plugins - where the same agent logic powers both terminal workflows and rich editor integration - would serve users who want visual affordances (inline diffs, symbol navigation, test result overlays) alongside terminal autonomy, without duplicating agent logic across environments. Building effective agentic coding systems requires navigating competing concerns: capability versus com-plexity, autonomy versus safety, generality versus token efficiency. The design space is rich with trade-offs where no single choice dominates. We hope that the architectural patterns, engineering lessons, and candid reflections on what worked and what did not, documented in this paper, help future builders of agentic systems make more informed decisions as they navigate these choices. 

## References 

[1] Anonymous. Agentic software engineering, foundational pillars and a research roadmap. arXiv preprint , 2025. [2] Anthropic. Model context protocol. https://modelcontextprotocol.io , 2024. Accessed: 2025-01-15. [3] Anthropic. Claude code: An agentic coding tool. https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/ agents-and-tools/claude-code/overview , 2025. Accessed: 2025-01-15. 52 [4] Anthropic. Effective context engineering for ai agents. https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/ effective-context-engineering-for-ai-agents , 2025. [5] Anysphere. Cursor: The ai code editor. https://cursor.com , 2025. [6] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning to re-trieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. [7] Jacob Austin et al. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 ,2021. [8] Alan Baddeley. Working memory. Science , 255(5044):556–559, 1992. [9] Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Aleš Kubíˇ cek, Robert Gerstenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Michal Podstawski, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoefler. Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2024. [10] Block. Goose: An open-source ai agent. https://github.com/block/goose , 2025. [11] Nghi D. Q. Bui, Hung Le, Yue Wang, Junnan Li, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Codetf: One-stop transformer library for state-of-the-art code llm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00029 ,2023. [12] Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, et al. MLE-bench: Evaluating machine learning agents on machine learning engineering. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. [13] Charm. Crush: An agentic coding tool for the terminal. https://github.com/charmbracelet/crush ,2025. [14] et al. Chen. Coder: Issue resolving with multi-agent and task graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01304 ,2024. [15] Mark Chen et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 ,2021. [16] Yuhao Chen, Xin Zhang, Tao Wang, et al. Specrover: Specification-guided patch generation. arXiv preprint , 2024. [17] Jeff Clune, Kenneth Stanley, et al. Diverse agent populations for more robust exploration. arXiv preprint , 2024. [18] Cognition. Introducing devin, the first ai software engineer. https://cognition.ai/blog/ introducing-devin , 2024. [19] OpenCode Contributors. Opencode: Ai-powered terminal assistant. https://github.com/ opencode-ai/opencode , 2025. [20] Chunyuan Deng, Yilun Zhao, Xiangru Tang, Mark Gerstein, and Arman Cohan. Investigating data contamination in modern benchmarks for large language models. NAACL , pages 8706–8719, 2024. [21] Xiang Deng, Jeff Da, Edwin Pan, Yannis Yiming He, Charles Ide, Kanak Garg, Niklas Lauffer, et al. Swe-bench pro: Can ai agents solve long-horizon software engineering tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.16941 , 2025. [22] Jingzhe Ding, Shengda Long, Changxin Pu, Huan Zhou, Hongwan Gao, Xiang Gao, Chao He, Yue Hou, Fei Hu, Zhaojian Li, et al. Nl2repo-bench: Towards long-horizon repository generation evaluation of coding agents, 2025. 53 [23] Xueying Du, Mingwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Hanlin Wang, Junwei Liu, Yixuan Chen, Jiayi Feng, Chaofeng Sha, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. Evaluating large language models in class-level code generation. In 

Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2024) , pages 81:1–81:13. ACM, 2024. [24] Aleksandra Eliseeva, Alexander Kovrigin, Ilia Kholkin, Egor Bogomolov, and Yaroslav Zharov. En-vbench: A benchmark for automated environment setup. In ICLR 2025 Third Workshop on Deep Learning for Code , 2025. [25] Yukang Feng, Jianwen Sun, Zelai Yang, et al. Longcli-bench: A preliminary benchmark and study for long-horizon agentic programming in command-line interfaces. arXiv preprint , 2025. [26] Luyu Gao et al. Pal: Program-aided language models. In ICML , 2023. [27] Paul Gauthier. Aider: Ai pair programming in your terminal. https://aider.chat , 2024. Accessed: 2025-01-15. [28] Tao Ge, Jing Hu, Xun Wang, Si-Qing Chen, and Furu Wei. In-context autoencoder for context compression in a large language model. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [29] GitHub. Github copilot: Meet the new coding agent. https://github.blog/news-insights/ product-news/github-copilot-meet-the-new-coding-agent/ , 2025. [30] Google. Gemini cli. https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-cli , 2025. [31] Daya Guo et al. Deepseek-coder: When the large language model meets programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196 , 2024. [32] Bernal Jimenez Gutierrez, Yiheng Shu, Yu Gu, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Yu Su. Hipporag: Neuro-biologically inspired long-term memory for large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37, 2024. [33] Wenqi He, Zonghai Chen, Xianwei Li, et al. Ehragent: Code empowers large language models for few-shot complex tabular reasoning on electronic health records. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07128 , 2024. [34] Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, and Dawn Song. Measuring coding challenge competence with apps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.09938 , 2021. [35] Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Fangyi Zhu, Jiahang Lin, Honglin Guo, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, et al. Memory in the age of ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13564 ,2025. [36] Qishuo Hua, Lyumanshan Ye, Dayuan Fu, Yang Xiao, Xiaojie Cai, Yunze Wu, Jifan Lin, Junfei Wang, and Pengfei Liu. Context engineering 2.0: The context of context engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26493 , 2025. [37] Carlos E Jimenez et al. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In ICLR ,2024. [38] Minki Kang, Wei-Ning Chen, Dongge Han, Huseyin A. Inan, Lukas Wutschitz, Yanzhi Chen, Robert Sim, and Saravan Rajmohan. Acon: Optimizing context compression for long-horizon llm agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00615 , 2025. [39] Thomas Kwa, Ben West, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia, Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar, Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney von Arx, et al. Measuring ai ability to complete long tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14499 , 2025. 54 [40] Thomas Kwa, Ben West, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia, Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar, Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney von Arx, et al. Measuring ai ability to complete long tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14499 , 2025. [41] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In NeurIPS , 2020. [42] Bowen Li, Wenhan Wu, Ziwei Tang, Lin Shi, John Yang, Jinyang Li, Shunyu Yao, Chen Qian, Binyuan Hui, Qicheng Zhang, et al. Prompting large language models to tackle the full software development lifecycle: A case study. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 7511–7531, Abu Dhabi, UAE, 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. [43] Caihua Li et al. Advances and frontiers of llm-based issue resolution in software engineering: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint , 2025. [44] Caihua Li et al. From code foundation models to agents and applications, a comprehensive survey and practical guide to code intelligence. arXiv preprint , 2025. [45] Raymond Li et al. Starcoder: May the source be with you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161 , 2023. [46] Wei Li, Xin Zhang, Zhongxin Guo, Shaoguang Mao, Wen Luo, Guangyue Peng, Yangyu Huang, Houfeng Wang, and Scarlett Li. Fea-bench: A benchmark for evaluating repository-level code genera-tion for feature implementation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06680 , 2025. [47] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science , 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022. [48] Yuntong Li, Yanjie Zhou, Zheng Liu, et al. Aegis: Automated environment setup for bug reproduction. 

arXiv preprint , 2024. [49] Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. ICRA , 2023. [50] Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050 , 2023. [51] Tianyu Liu, Daoguang Zan, Bei Chen, et al. Reasoning bank: Learning from trajectories for program repair. arXiv preprint , 2024. [52] Yuchen Liu, Tianyi Zhang, Yiming Wang, et al. Efficient evaluation of llm agents: Cost, latency, and token consumption. arXiv preprint , 2024. [53] Lingrui Mei, Jiayu Yao, Yuyao Ge, Yiwei Wang, Baolong Bi, Yujun Cai, Jiazhi Liu, Mingyu Li, Zhong-Zhi Li, Duzhen Zhang, et al. A survey of context engineering for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13334 , 2025. [54] Mike A. Merrill, Alexander G. Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, et al. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. arXiv preprint , 2025. [55] Microsoft. Language server protocol specification. https://microsoft.github.io/ language-server-protocol/ , 2016. Accessed: 2025-01-15. [56] Samuel Miserendino, Michele Wang, Tejal Patwardhan, and Johannes Heidecke. SWE-lancer: Can frontier LLMs earn $1 million from real-world freelance software engineering? In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. 55 [57] Niels Mündler, Mark Niklas Mueller, Jingxuan He, and Martin Vechev. SWT-bench: Testing and validating real-world bug-fixes with code agents. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [58] Deepak Nathani, Lovish Madaan, Nicholas Roberts, Nikolay Bashlykov, Ajay Menon, Vincent Moens, Mikhail Plekhanov, et al. MLGym: A new framework and benchmark for advancing AI research agents. In Second Conference on Language Modeling , 2025. [59] Isaac Ong, Amjad Almahairi, Vincent Wu, Wei-Lin Chiang, Tianhao Wu, Joseph E Gonzalez, M Waleed Kadous, and Ion Stoica. Routellm: Learning to route llms with preference data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18665 , 2024. [60] Open Interpreter. Open interpreter. https://github.com/OpenInterpreter/open-interpreter , 2023. Accessed: 2025-01-15. [61] OpenAI. Introducing swe-bench verified. https://openai.com/index/ introducing-swe-bench-verified/ , 2024. [62] OpenAI. Introducing codex. https://openai.com/index/introducing-codex/ , 2025. [63] Charles Packer et al. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 ,2023. [64] Shishir G. Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Fanjia Yan, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. The berkeley function calling leaderboard (bfcl): From tool use to agentic evaluation of large language models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [65] Minh VT Pham, Huy N Phan, Hoang N Phan, Cuong Le Chi, Tien N Nguyen, and Nghi DQ Bui. Swe-synth: Synthesizing verifiable bug-fix data to enable large language models in resolving real-world bugs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14757 , 2025. [66] Huy Nhat Phan, Tien N Nguyen, Phong X Nguyen, and Nghi DQ Bui. Hyperagent: Generalist software engineering agents to solve coding tasks at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16299 , 2024. [67] Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A. Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350 , 2022. [68] Bo Qiao et al. Taskweaver: A code-first agent framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17541 , 2023. [69] Baptiste Rozière et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 ,2023. [70] Parth Sarthi, Salman Abdullah, Aditi Tuli, Shubh Khanna, Anna Goldie, and Christopher D. Manning. Raptor: Recursive abstractive processing for tree-organized retrieval. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [71] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:8634–8652, 2023. [72] Zachary S Siegel, Sayash Kapoor, Nitya Nadgir, Benedikt Stroebl, and Arvind Narayanan. CORE-bench: Fostering the credibility of published research through a computational reproducibility agent benchmark. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. [73] Weiwei Sun, Miao Lu, Zhan Ling, Kang Liu, Xuesong Yao, Yiming Yang, and Jiecao Chen. Scaling long-horizon llm agent via context-folding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11967 , 2025. [74] Zhiyu Tang, Yue Wang, Xu Zhou, Xin Eric Wang, et al. Codeagents: Interactive code generation through multi-agent programming. arXiv preprint , 2024. 56 [75] Wei Tao et al. Magis: Llm-based multi-agent framework for github issue resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17927 , 2024. [76] Minh VT Thai, Tue Le, Dung Nguyen Manh, Huy Phan Nhat, and Nghi DQ Bui. Swe-evo: Bench-marking coding agents in long-horizon software evolution scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.18470 ,2025. [77] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Interleaving re-trieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10509 , 2022. [78] Guanzhi Wang et al. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023. [79] Shuang Wang, Bowen Li, Yong Chen, et al. Issue2test: From issue reports to test cases. arXiv preprint ,2024. [80] Xingyao Wang et al. Executable code actions elicit better llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01030 ,2024. [81] Xingyao Wang et al. Openhands: An open platform for ai software developers as generalist agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741 , 2024. [82] Yiming Wang, Jun Zhang, Yizhe Li, et al. Experience-driven monte carlo tree search. arXiv preprint ,2024. [83] Yiming Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Zhengyang Chen, et al. Codemonkeys: Massively parallel state machines for inference-time scaling. arXiv preprint , 2024. [84] Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Nghi D. Q. Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Codet5+: Open code large language models for code understanding and generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2023. [85] Tianxin Wei, Ting-Wei Li, Zhining Liu, Xuying Ning, Ze Yang, Jiaru Zou, Zhichen Zeng, Ruizhong Qiu, Xiao Lin, Dongqi Fu, et al. Agentic reasoning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.12538 ,2026. [86] Chunqiu Steven Xia et al. Agentless: Demystifying llm-based software engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01489 , 2024. [87] Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, et al. OSWorld: Benchmarking multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. [88] Benfeng Xu, Licheng Zhang, Zhendong Mao, Quan Wang, Hongtao Xie, and Yongdong Zhang. Curriculum learning for natural language understanding. ACL , 2020. [89] Binfeng Xu et al. Rewoo: Decoupling reasoning from observations for efficient augmented language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18323 , 2023. [90] Cheng Xu, Shuhao Guan, Derek Greene, and M-Tahar Kechadi. Benchmark data contamination of large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04244 , 2024. [91] John Yang et al. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15793 , 2024. [92] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:50528–50652, 2024. 57 [93] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alex L Zhang, Kilian Lieret, Joyce Yang, Xindi Wu, Ori Press, Niklas Muennighoff, Gabriel Synnaeve, Karthik R Narasimhan, et al. SWE-bench multimodal: Do AI systems generalize to visual software domains? In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [94] Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik R Narasimhan. {$\tau$}-bench: A benchmark for \underline{T}ool-\underline{A}gent-\underline{U}ser interaction in real-world domains. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [95] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2023. [96] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [97] Christine Ye, Sihan Yuan, Suchetha Cooray, Steven Dillmann, Ian L. V. Roque, Dalya Baron, Philipp Frank, Sergio Martin-Alvarez, et al. Replicationbench: Can ai agents replicate astrophysics research papers? arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24591 , 2025. [98] Haoran Ye, Xuning He, Vincent Arak, Haonan Dong, and Guojie Song. Meta context engineering via agentic skill evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21557 , 2026. [99] Justin Young. Effective harnesses for long-running agents. https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/ effective-harnesses-for-long-running-agents , 2025. Anthropic Engineering Blog. [100] Matei Zaharia, Omar Khattab, Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Heather Miller, Chris Potts, James Zou, Michael Carbin, Jonathan Frankle, Naveen Rao, and Ali Ghodsi. The shift from models to compound ai systems. https://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/2024/02/18/compound-ai-systems/ , 2024. [101] Daoguang Zan, Zhirong Huang, Wei Liu, Hanwu Chen, Shulin Xin, Linhao Zhang, Qi Liu, Aoyan Li, Lu Chen, Xiaojian Zhong, et al. Multi-swe-bench: A multilingual benchmark for issue resolving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02605 , 2025. [102] Genghan Zhang, Weixin Liang, Olivia Hsu, and Kunle Olukotun. Adaptive self-improvement llm agentic system for ml library development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02534 , 2025. [103] Lei Zhang, Weizheng Chen, Yuting Liu, et al. Experepair: Dual-memory architecture for autonomous program repair. arXiv preprint , 2024. [104] Qizheng Zhang, Changran Hu, Shubhangi Upasani, Boyuan Ma, Fenglu Hong, Vamsidhar Kamanuru, Jay Rainton, Chen Wu, Mengmeng Ji, Hanchen Li, et al. Agentic context engineering: Evolving contexts for self-improving language models. The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. [105] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. Autocoderover: Autonomous program improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , pages 1592–1604. ACM, 2024. [106] Yuting Zhang, Zhiyuan Fan, Wei Liu, et al. Otter: Generating failing tests from issue descriptions. 

arXiv preprint , 2024. [107] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2023. [108] Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. Memorybank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2024. 58 [109] Jieyi Zhou, Shreyas Agarwal, Kiante Brantley, et al. Tree search for language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01476 , 2024. [110] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. [111] Yuxuan Zhu, Tengjun Jin, Yada Pruksachatkun, Andy Zhang, Shu Liu, Sasha Cui, Sayash Kapoor, et al. Establishing best practices for building rigorous agentic benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02825 ,2025. [112] Yuxuan Zhu, Tengjun Jin, Yada Pruksachatkun, Andy Zhang, Shu Liu, Sasha Cui, Sayash Kapoor, et al. Establishing Best Practices for Building Rigorous Agentic Benchmarks, 2025. 59 A Complete Tool Catalog 

Table 1 provides the complete catalog of all built-in tools available in O PEN DEV , organized by handler category. Each tool is described in the main text (Section 2.4); this appendix serves as a quick reference. In addition to these built-in tools, any number of external tools can be dynamically discovered via MCP (Section 2.4.7). 

## B LSP Language Server Matrix 

Table 2 lists all programming languages supported through LSP integration with their corresponding language servers. The system supports a wide range of standard languages plus several experimental servers, all defined in ls_config.py .

## C Modular System Prompt Composition 

This appendix documents the complete prompt section registry used by O PEN DEV ’s PromptComposer (Sec-tion 2.3.1). The main text describes the filter–sort–load–join pipeline and its rationale; this appendix provides the full inventory of sections, their conditions, and their roles. The verbatim content of every template is reproduced in Section K. 

C.1 Main Agent Prompt Sections 

The default action-mode agent registers its sections via create_default_composer() . Table 3 lists each section with its activation condition, cacheability for Anthropic prompt caching, and a brief summary. 

C.2 Thinking Mode Prompt Sections 

The thinking-mode agent registers only 4 sections via create_thinking_composer() , deliberately omitting tool-use and code-quality guidance to avoid biasing tool-free reasoning toward premature action. 

C.3 Specialized Templates 

Five standalone templates serve specific roles outside the normal section registry. These are loaded directly by their respective subsystems rather than through PromptComposer auto-registration. 

C.4 Composition Mechanics 

The composition pipeline operates as follows: 

• Filter → Sort → Load → Join: Each registered section’s condition predicate is evaluated against the runtime context dictionary. Sections returning False are excluded before any file I/O. Surviving sections are sorted by ascending priority, loaded from their markdown files (with frontmatter stripped), and concatenated with double-newline separators. 

• Two-part composition for prompt caching: The compose_two_part() method partitions sections into 

stable (cacheable) and dynamic parts. For Anthropic’s API, the stable part receives a cache_control header, yielding approximately 88% cost reduction on the cached portion across multi-turn sessions. Typically 19 of 21 sections are stable; only scratchpad and reminders-note are dynamic. 

• Mode-specific composers: A factory function create_composer(templates_dir, mode) returns the ap-propriate composer: "system/main" yields the 21-section action composer; "system/thinking" yields the 4-section thinking composer. Planning mode uses a standalone template optimized for read-only exploration. 60 • Variable substitution: Templates use ${VAR} placeholders resolved at render time by PromptRenderer .A centralized PromptVariables registry maps symbolic names to concrete tool identifiers (e.g., 

${EDIT_TOOL.name} → edit_file ), decoupling template prose from tool naming. 

• Two-tier fallback: If an individual section file is missing, the composer skips it and proceeds with a reduced prompt. If modular composition fails wholesale (e.g., templates directory absent), the builder falls back to a monolithic core template, guaranteeing agent startup under partial-deployment conditions. 

## D Edit Tool Fuzzy Matching Chain 

The edit_file tool (Section 2.4.2) implements a chain-of-responsibility pattern with nine replacer classes, each addressing a specific mismatch category between the LLM’s specified old_content and the actual file content. The chain short-circuits on first match, so exact matches incur zero overhead from the fuzzy passes. Each replacer returns the actual substring found in the original file (not the search query), preserving the file’s original formatting. 1. Simple: Exact string match (baseline). 2. Line-trimmed: Strip trailing whitespace per line before comparing. 3. Block-anchor: Use first and last lines as anchors; score middle region via SequenceMatcher with a 0.3 similarity threshold for multi-candidate matches. 4. Whitespace-normalized: Collapse all whitespace runs to single spaces. 5. Indentation-flexible: Ignore all leading whitespace, skip blank lines. 6. Escape-normalized: Unescape common sequences ( \n , \t , \\ ). 7. Trimmed-boundary: Try trimmed content; expand to full line boundaries if partial match found. 8. Context-aware: Use first and last non-empty lines as anchors, score all candidate regions with a 0.5 similarity threshold. 9. Multi-occurrence: Trimmed line-by-line exact match as last resort across all occurrences. 

## E Shell Execution Pipeline 

The shell execution pipeline (Section 2.4.3) processes every run_command invocation through six stages, illustrated in Figure 17. 

E.1 Six-Stage Pipeline Details 

1. Safety gates. Three checks run before any command executes: (a) permission configuration determines whether the command class requires approval; (b) allowed-command matching checks against user-configured safe patterns; (c) dangerous pattern blocking rejects catastrophic operations ( rm -rf / , sudo ,fork bombs, curl|bash pipe chains, dd to device files) with no user override. 2. Command preparation. Interactive prompts are auto-confirmed for known package managers ( npm init ,

npx ) by prepending yes | . Python commands receive PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1 to prevent output buffering that would defeat real-time streaming. 3. Server detection. A regex match against 16 server patterns (Table 6) auto-promotes matching commands to background mode regardless of the caller’s setting. 4. Execution fork. Background commands spawn in a pseudo-terminal ( pty.openpty() with Popen at-tached to the slave file descriptor) for terminal-emulated output that correctly handles ANSI codes, progress bars, and interactive programs. Foreground commands use subprocess.Popen with pipes and 

start_new_session=True for process-group isolation, ensuring that killing the command kills all child processes. 5. Output management. Output is capped at 30,000 characters using head-tail truncation (first 10,000 + last 10,000 on overflow). Real-time streaming delivers output to the UI via callback. select.select() polls at 100ms intervals, balancing responsiveness against CPU overhead. 61 6. Timeout and interrupt. Idle timeout kills commands after 60 seconds of no output. Absolute timeout caps execution at 600 seconds. The InterruptToken (shared per user query) is checked each polling cycle; when triggered, the handler kills the entire process group via os.killpg() .

E.2 Server Detection Patterns 

Table 6 lists the 16 regex patterns used to auto-promote commands to background mode. All patterns are matched with re.IGNORECASE .

## F System Reminder Catalog 

This appendix provides the complete catalog of the 24 named system reminders described in Section 2.3.4, organized by category, along with the 9-step injection timing within each ReAct iteration. 

F.1 Reminder Categories 

The 24 reminders are organized into six functional categories: 

• Phase control (4 reminders): Manage thinking/action phase transitions. Inject thinking traces into the action phase context; control whether the agent should reason deeply or act directly. 

• Task lifecycle (5 reminders): Steer phase transitions in multi-step workflows. After a subagent returns, nudge the main agent to synthesize results. After plan approval, restate the plan and todos with explicit workflow instructions. On session resume, reference the existing plan file. 

• Todo enforcement (2 reminders): Gate premature completion. When the agent calls task_complete with incomplete todos, reject the call and list remaining items. When all todos are done, signal finalization. Capped at 2 nudges per run. 

• Error recovery (8 reminders): One generic nudge plus six type-specific nudges selected by error classi-fication (permission, file-not-found, syntax, rate-limit, timeout, edit-mismatch) and one Docker-specific nudge. Capped at 3 attempts per error sequence. 

• Behavioral (5 reminders): Correct observable anti-patterns. After 5+ consecutive read-only tool calls, break the exploration spiral. After the user denies a tool call, prevent re-attempt. On empty completion, request a brief outcome summary. At the iteration safety limit, force summarization. 

• JSON retry (2 reminders): Specialized parse-retry prompts for the memory system’s Reflector and Curator components when JSON output fails to parse. 

F.2 Injection Timing 

Reminders are injected by the ReAct executor in a strict 9-step ordering within each iteration: 1. Auto-compaction check (context pressure evaluation). 2. Interrupt check (user cancellation). 3. Thinking phase with optional trace injection into action context. 4. Subagent-completion signal (if a subagent returned results). 5. Drain UI-thread messages (approval results, user input). 6. Interrupt check (second gate before LLM call). 7. Action phase LLM call. 8. Response dispatch: reminders diverge based on response type: 

• No tool calls path: check for failed-tool nudges, incomplete-todo nudges, and empty-completion nudges, in that order. 

• Has tool calls path: after tool execution, check for plan-approved signals, all-todos-complete signals, tool-denied nudges, and consecutive-reads nudges. 9. Session persistence (auto-save). 62 Safety guards. Two mechanisms prevent reminder degeneration into noise: (1) one-shot flags ensure certain reminders fire at most once per agent run ( plan_approved_signal_injected , all_todos_complete_nudged ,

completion_nudge_sent ); and (2) attempt budgets cap repeatable reminders ( MAX_TODO_NUDGES = 2,

MAX_NUDGE_ATTEMPTS = 3 ). 

## G Subagent Capability Matrix 

Table 7 documents the complete subagent registry. Each subagent receives a filtered tool set restricted to its domain, preventing scope creep and limiting blast radius. All subagents run with unlimited iteration budgets by default; the ask-user subagent is a special case that bypasses the LLM execution path entirely. 

## H Configuration Schema 

Table 8 describes the key configuration fields in O PEN DEV ’s AppConfig model. 

## I Implementation Constants 

This section documents key implementation constants with their rationale. 

## J CLI Command Reference 

Common command-line options and interactive commands: 

Launch options: 

• opendev - Start interactive terminal UI 

• opendev -p "prompt" - Non-interactive single prompt execution 

• opendev –continue - Resume most recent session 

• opendev –working-dir /path - Set project context 

• opendev run ui - Start web UI 

Interactive commands (slash commands): 

• /mode - Toggle between normal and plan mode 

• /undo - Undo recent file operations 

• /clear - Clear conversation history 

• /sessions - List available sessions 

• /thinking - Configure thinking level 

• /exit - Exit the session 

MCP server management: 

• opendev mcp list - List configured MCP servers 

• opendev mcp add <name> <command> - Add MCP server 

• opendev mcp enable <name> - Enable MCP server 

• opendev mcp disable <name> - Disable MCP server 

Keyboard shortcuts (TUI): 

• Shift+Tab - Toggle normal/plan mode 

• Ctrl+C - Interrupt agent execution 63 • Ctrl+L - Clear screen 

• / + text - Trigger command autocomplete 

## K Full System Prompt Templates 

This appendix reproduces the verbatim content of every system prompt template used by O PEN DEV . Each template is a Markdown file stored under templates/system/ and loaded by the PromptComposer after stripping HTML frontmatter (Section C). The content shown here is exactly what the LLM receives as part of its system prompt. Templates are grouped by their role: core identity (Section K.1), the 21 main agent sections sorted by priority band (Section K.2), the 4 thinking mode sections (Section K.3), and 3 specialized standalone templates (Section K.4). 

K.1 Core Identity Template 

The core identity template establishes the agent’s persona and is loaded as a wrapper before the modular sections are appended. 

D main.md 

You are OpenDev, an AI software engineering assistant with full access to all tools. You are at senior level of software engineer. For straightforward tasks like reading files, making edits, running commands, or quick searches, you execute them directly yourself. However, when a task is complex, multi-step, or would benefit from focused context (such as deep codebase exploration, comprehensive code review, or multi-file refactoring), delegate to a specialized subagent. Choose the right tool or subagent based on the task -- see the Tool Selection Guide for details. 

K.2 Main Agent Prompt Sections 

The following 21 sections are registered by create_default_composer() and assembled via the filter–sort– load–join pipeline described in Section C.4. They are presented here in priority order (lower priority number = earlier in the composed prompt). 

K.2.1 Core Identity and Policies (Priority 10–30) 

D main-mode-awareness.md 

# Planning For non-trivial implementation tasks, use the Planner subagent to explore the codebase and create a structured plan before writing code. Spawn via spawn_subagent(subagent_type="Planner"). Include in the prompt: - The task description and relevant context - A plan file path under ~/.opendev/plans/ (e.g., ~/.opendev/plans/add-auth-flow.md) After the Planner returns, call present_plan(plan_file_path="...") to show the plan to the user and get approval. If the user requests modifications, re-spawn the Planner with feedback and the same plan file path. If rejected, ask the user how to proceed. 

D main-security-policy.md 

# Security Policy **IMPORTANT**: Assist with authorized security testing, defensive security, CTF challenges, and educational contexts. Refuse requests for: - Destructive techniques or DoS attacks - Mass targeting or supply chain compromise - Detection evasion for malicious purposes Dual-use security tools (C2 frameworks, credential testing, exploit development) require clear authorization context: pentesting engagements, CTF competitions, security research, or defensive use cases. 

64 **IMPORTANT**: Never generate or guess URLs unless you are confident they help with programming tasks. You may use URLs provided by the user or found in local files. 

D main-tone-and-style.md 

# Tone and Style - Keep responses to 3 lines or fewer when practical - Be direct and professional - no preambles - Use GitHub-flavored Markdown for formatting - Never expose tool names - speak naturally - Only use emojis if the user explicitly requests them - Never create files unless absolutely necessary - prefer editing existing files - Prioritize technical accuracy over validating beliefs - disagree when necessary - Avoid over-the-top validation like "You 're absolutely right" - Do not use a colon before tool calls - use "Let me read the file." not "Let me read the file:" 

D main-no-time-estimates.md 

# No Time Estimates === CRITICAL === Never give time estimates or predictions for how long tasks will take. Focus on what needs to be done, not how long it might take. 

K.2.2 Interaction and Tool Guidance (Priority 40–50) 

D main-interaction-pattern.md 

# Interaction Pattern 1. **Think**: Briefly explain what you 're about to do (1-2 sentences) 2. **Act**: IMMEDIATELY call tools in the SAME response 3. **Observe**: Acknowledge key results 4. **Repeat**: Continue until task is complete 5. **Complete**: When the task is done, provide a brief summary of what was accomplished (1-3 sentences). Include concrete details like file names, commit hashes, or endpoints created. **CRITICAL**: Never say "I 'll do X" without calling the tool in that same response. 

D main-available-tools.md 

# Available Tools Tool schemas are provided separately. Key categories: **File**: read_file, write_file, edit_file **Search**: list_files (glob patterns), search (regex with `type="text" `

or AST with `type="ast" `)**Symbols**: find_symbol, find_referencing_symbols, rename_symbol, replace_symbol_body **Commands**: run_command, list_processes, get_process_output, kill_process **User Interaction**: ask_user (ask clarifying questions when implementing technical tasks with unclear requirements. Do NOT use for greetings, social messages, or simple conversations) **Web**: fetch_url (use `deep_crawl=true ` for crawling), capture_web_screenshot, capture_screenshot, analyze_image, open_browser **MCP**: search_tools (keyword query) -> discover MCP tools, then call them with data queries **Todos**: write_todos, update_todo, complete_todo, list_todos **Subagents**: spawn_subagent (for complex tasks, user questions, deep research, multi-file work) **MCP Workflow**: `search_tools("github repository") ` finds tools like 

`mcp__github__search_repositories `. Then call the discovered tool with your data query (e.g., `language:java stars:>=500 `). **Subagent Guidance**: Use `spawn_subagent ` for tasks requiring fresh context: large features, deep research, multi-file refactoring, or asking user clarifying questions. Results aren 't visible to user - summarize them. Don 't spawn for single file edits or quick checks. 

65 D main-tool-selection.md 

# Tool Selection Guide When choosing tools, prefer the more specific option: - **Reading files**: read_file (NOT run_command with cat/head/tail) - **Editing files**: edit_file (NOT run_command with sed/awk) - **Creating files**: write_file (NOT run_command with echo/cat heredoc) - **Searching code**: search (NOT run_command with grep/rg) - **Listing files**: list_files (NOT run_command with find/ls) ## Tool vs Subagent Decision Guide **Use direct tools when you have a known target** (specific file, function, pattern -- typically 1-3 tool calls): - "Read src/app.py" -> `read_file ` (known path, single file) - "Show me the config file" -> `read_file ` + `list_files ` (simple lookup) - "Find function handleError" -> `search ` (specific code search) - "List all Python files" -> `list_files ` (simple pattern match) - "Find all API endpoints" -> `search ` with pattern (specific grep query) - "What 's in the database models?" -> `read_file ` on models.py - "Run the tests" -> `run_command ` (single command) **Use subagents when exploration or specialization is needed** (5+ tool calls or multiple files): - "How does authentication work?" -> **Code-Explorer** - "What 's the architecture of module X?" -> **Code-Explorer** - "Explain the error handling strategy" -> **Code-Explorer** - "Clone this website" -> **Web-clone** (specialized task) - "Should I use Redis or Memcached?" -> **ask-user** - "Create a landing page for X" -> **Web-Generator** **Use the Planner subagent for planning and design tasks**: - "Design a caching layer" -> **Planner** subagent - "Implement user registration" -> **Planner** subagent first, then implement **Rule of thumb**: - **Known target** (specific file, function, pattern) -> **Direct tools** - **Exploration needed** (understand how, find strategy) -> **Subagent** - **Single file** -> **Direct** - **Multiple files or deep analysis** -> **Subagent** - **Parallel subagents**: When the task has independent parts, make multiple spawn_subagent calls in a single response. They execute concurrently. - **Parallel read-only tools**: When you need to read multiple files, search for multiple patterns, or fetch multiple URLs, make all calls in a single response. Independent read-only tools execute concurrently when batched. 

K.2.3 Code Quality and Safety (Priority 55–65) 

D main-code-quality.md 

# Code Quality Standards You are highly capable and can help users complete ambitious tasks that would otherwise be too complex or take too long. Defer to user judgement about whether a task is too large to attempt. Focus on what needs to be done, not potential difficulties. **IMPORTANT**: NEVER propose changes to code you haven 't read - always read files first ## Quality Rules - Follow existing conventions strictly; keep changes focused and minimal - Security: Avoid command injection, XSS, SQL injection. Fix insecure code immediately. - Don 't add features or refactoring beyond what was asked - Don 't add docstrings, comments, or type annotations to unchanged code - Don 't create helpers or abstractions for one-time operations - Run project-specific quality checks after changes (build, lint, tests) ## Anti-patterns to Avoid [X] **Over-engineering**: Creating abstractions for single-use code [X] **Scope creep**: Adding features not requested [X] **Premature optimization**: Optimizing before measuring [X] **Backward-compatibility hacks**: Keeping unused code "just in case" [v] **Focused changes**: Minimal diff, clear purpose [v] **Existing patterns**: Follow what 's already there [v] **Delete unused code**: If certain it 's unused, delete completely 

66 D main-action-safety.md 

# Action Safety Carefully consider the reversibility and blast radius of actions. You can freely take local, reversible actions like editing files or running tests. But for actions that are hard to reverse, affect shared systems, or could be destructive, check with the user before proceeding. The cost of pausing to confirm is low, while the cost of an unwanted action (lost work, unintended messages sent, deleted branches) can be very high. By default, transparently communicate the action and ask for confirmation before proceeding. If the user explicitly asks you to operate more autonomously, you may proceed without confirmation, but still attend to risks. A user approving an action once does NOT mean they approve it in all contexts -- authorization stands for the scope specified, not beyond. ## Risk Categories **Destructive operations** (require confirmation): - Deleting files or branches - Dropping database tables - Killing processes - `rm -rf ` or overwriting uncommitted changes **Hard-to-reverse operations** (require confirmation): - Force-pushing (can overwrite upstream) - `git reset --hard `

- Amending published commits - Removing or downgrading packages/dependencies - Modifying CI/CD pipelines **Actions visible to others** (require confirmation): - Pushing code - Creating, closing, or commenting on PRs or issues - Sending messages (Slack, email, GitHub) - Posting to external services - Modifying shared infrastructure or permissions ## Principles - When encountering an obstacle, do NOT use destructive actions as a shortcut. Identify root causes and fix underlying issues rather than bypassing safety checks (e.g., `--no-verify `)- If you discover unexpected state (unfamiliar files, branches, configuration), investigate before deleting or overwriting -- it may represent the user 's in-progress work - Resolve merge conflicts rather than discarding changes - If a lock file exists, investigate what process holds it rather than deleting it - Measure twice, cut once 

D main-read-before-edit.md 

# Read-Before-Edit Pattern === CRITICAL === **Always read a file before editing it.** Never edit based on memory alone. The edit_file tool requires old_content to match exactly -- if you haven 'tread the file recently, your edit will fail. **Pattern**: 1. Read file with `read_file `

2. Identify exact content to change 3. Call `edit_file ` with exact old_content **Anti-pattern**: [X] Edit file without reading first (will fail) [v] Read -> Edit (reliable) 

D main-error-recovery.md 

# Error Recovery When a tool fails, read the error message carefully and apply the matching resolution: - **"File not found"** -- Path is incorrect. Use `list_files ` or `search `

to locate the correct path before retrying. 

67 - **"Permission denied"** -- Insufficient permissions. Check file permissions or try a different approach. - **"old_content not found"** -- The file has changed since you last read it, or your memory of the content is wrong. Re-read the file and retry with the correct content. - **Rate limit errors** -- Too many requests. The system retries automatically; if it persists, reduce concurrency. **Process**: 1. Read the error message carefully 2. Match the error to a known pattern above 3. Apply the resolution strategy 4. Retry with the corrected approach 5. If still failing, ask the user for help **NEVER**: - Retry the same failing command repeatedly without changes - Ignore error messages - Continue without fixing the root cause 

D main-subagent-guide.md 

# Subagent Guide Subagents are specialized agents with focused capabilities. Each has a specific purpose and tool set. Choose the right subagent based on your task requirements. ## ask-user **Purpose**: Gather clarifying information through structured multiple-choice questions. **When to use**: Need to clarify ambiguous requirements, gather user preferences, or confirm critical decisions before implementation. ## Code-Explorer **Purpose**: Answer specific questions about LOCAL codebase with minimal context and maximum accuracy. **When to use**: Understanding code architecture, finding specific implementations, tracing code patterns, or researching implementation details in LOCAL files. ## Security-Reviewer **Purpose**: Security-focused code review with structured vulnerability reporting. **When to use**: Security audits, reviewing code changes for vulnerabilities, pre-merge security checks. Reports findings with severity/confidence scoring. ## PR-Reviewer **Purpose**: Review GitHub pull requests for correctness, style, performance, tests, and security. **When to use**: Reviewing PRs before merge, analyzing diffs, providing structured code review feedback. ## Project-Init **Purpose**: Analyze a codebase and generate an OPENDEV.md project instruction file. **When to use**: Setting up a new project, generating build/test/lint commands, documenting project structure. ## Web-clone **Purpose**: Analyze websites and generate code to replicate their UI/design. **When to use**: Cloning landing pages, dashboards, or any web UI. ## Web-Generator **Purpose**: Create beautiful, responsive web applications from scratch. **When to use**: Building new web apps, landing pages, dashboards, or UI-focused projects. ## Planner **Purpose**: Explore the codebase and create detailed implementation plans. **When to use**: New feature implementation, multi-file changes, architectural decisions, unclear requirements. Prefer planning for any non-trivial task. **Flow**: spawn_subagent(Planner) with a plan file path -> receive plan -> present_plan -> approval ## General Guidance ## Parallel Subagent Spawning 

68 **IMPORTANT**: When spawning multiple subagents for independent work, make ALL spawn_subagent calls in the SAME response. This is the ONLY way to get parallel execution. If you make them in separate responses, they run sequentially. **When to spawn in parallel** (multiple spawn_subagent calls in one response): - User explicitly asks for multiple agents - The codebase is large -- split exploration across multiple agents to cover more ground efficiently - Independent research tasks exploring different parts of the codebase - Tasks that can be divided into non-overlapping areas of investigation **When NOT to use subagents**: - Single file edits or quick checks - Simple grep/search operations - Reading a single file - Running a single command - Creative or greenfield tasks with no existing codebase - When the task doesn 't match any subagent 's purpose -- don 't force-fit **IMPORTANT**: Subagent results aren 't visible to the user -- you must always present their findings in your response. When **multiple subagents** return results (parallel execution), do NOT summarize each agent separately. Instead: - Synthesize all results into a single unified response organized by topic, not by agent - Merge overlapping findings and eliminate redundancy - Present the combined knowledge as if it came from one source 

K.2.4 Conditional Sections (Priority 70–80) 

These sections are included only when their runtime condition evaluates to True (e.g., the project is a Git repository, todo tracking is enabled, or a specific model provider is in use). 

D main-git-workflow.md 

# Git Workflow When asked to commit: 1. Run `git status && git diff HEAD && git log -n 3 `

2. Draft commit message (focus on "why" over "what") 3. Always pass the commit message via a HEREDOC for correct formatting: 

``` 

git commit -m "$(cat << 'EOF '

Commit message here. EOF )" 

``` 

4. Execute commit; summarize with commit hash and message ## Git Safety Protocol === CRITICAL RULES === - NEVER update git config, skip hooks, or use --amend unless explicitly requested - NEVER run destructive commands (push --force, hard reset) unless explicitly requested - NEVER force push to main/master - warn user if requested - NEVER commit changes unless the user explicitly asks - NEVER use the `-i ` flag (e.g., `git rebase -i `, `git add -i `) --interactive mode is not supported in non-interactive environments - NEVER use `--no-edit ` with `git rebase ` -- it is not a valid rebase option - If commit FAILED or was REJECTED by hook, fix the issue and create a NEW commit (NOT amend -- amend would modify the PREVIOUS commit) **Anti-patterns to avoid:** - `git commit --no-verify ` (skips hooks) - `git push --force origin main ` (destructive) - `git commit --amend ` after hook failure (modifies wrong commit) - `git rebase -i ` (requires interactive terminal) ## Creating Pull Requests When asked to create a PR: 1. Run `git status `, `git diff `, check if branch tracks remote 2. Run `git log ` and `git diff <base-branch>...HEAD ` to understand all 

69 commits 3. Analyze ALL commits (not just the latest) and draft a concise PR title (<70 chars) 4. Push to remote with `-u ` flag if needed 5. Create PR using: 

``` 

gh pr create --title "the pr title" --body "$(cat << 'EOF '

## Summary <1-3 bullet points> ## Test plan - [ ] Testing step 1 - [ ] Testing step 2 EOF )" 

``` 

6. Return the PR URL to the user 

D main-task-tracking.md 

# Task Tracking Use todos for multi-file changes, feature implementation, or build/test/fix cycles. Skip for simple single-file edits. ## Workflow 1. Create todos ONCE at start with `write_todos ` (all start as `pending `)2. Work through todos IN ORDER: - `update_todo(id, status="in_progress") ` when starting - Do the work - `complete_todo(id) ` when finished 3. Keep only ONE todo `in_progress ` at a time 4. **NEVER skip todos** - if work was done implicitly, mark it complete 5. **The system will remind you if todos remain incomplete when you try to finish** ## When to Use [v] Multi-file changes [v] Feature implementation with multiple steps [v] Build/test/fix cycles [X] Simple single-file edits ## Formatting Todo content must be plain text -- no markdown (no bold, italic, backticks, or links). The system strips markdown automatically, so formatting is wasted tokens. 

D main-provider-openai.md 

# Provider-Specific Notes - You are running on an OpenAI model via the OpenAI API - Tool calls use the `function ` calling convention with JSON arguments - When reasoning models (o1, o3, o4-mini) are detected, temperature is not sent and the system prompt is sent as a developer message - For vision tasks, images are passed as base64-encoded `image_url `

content parts - Structured output via `response_format ` is available but not used by default 

D main-provider-anthropic.md 

# Provider-Specific Notes - You are running on an Anthropic Claude model - Tool calls use the Anthropic tool_use block format - Extended thinking is available and controlled by the thinking budget parameter - When thinking is enabled, your reasoning traces are captured and displayed to the user - For vision tasks, images are passed as base64-encoded source blocks - Cache control headers are used to optimize prompt caching for long system prompts 

70 D main-provider-fireworks.md 

# Provider-Specific Notes - You are running on a model hosted via Fireworks AI - The API is OpenAI-compatible; tool calls use the `function ` calling convention - Some models may have smaller context windows -- be mindful of output length - Fireworks models typically have fast inference but may not support extended thinking - For best results, keep tool arguments concise and avoid very large file reads in a single call 

K.2.5 Context Awareness (Priority 85–95) 

D main-output-awareness.md 

# Output Awareness Tool outputs may be truncated to prevent context bloat: - **read_file** -- Default limit of 2000 lines. Use `offset ` and 

`max_lines ` parameters to page through larger files. - **search** -- Capped at 50 matches and 30K characters. Narrow the search path or use a more specific pattern for better results. - **run_command** -- Capped at 30K characters. Output is middle-truncated, preserving the first and last 10K characters. **When you see truncation**: - Narrow your query (more specific search pattern) - Use pagination (offset/limit for read_file) - Split into smaller operations 

D main-scratchpad.md 

# Scratchpad For temporary files (drafts, scratch work, intermediate outputs), use 

`~/.opendev/sessions/{session_id}/scratch/ ` instead of `/tmp `. This avoids collisions between concurrent sessions and enables automatic cleanup with session data. 

D main-code-references.md 

# Code References When referencing specific functions or code locations, include 

`file_path:line_number `:## Example 

``` 

user: Where are errors from the client handled? assistant: Clients are marked as failed in `connectToServer ` in src/services/process.ts:712. 

``` 

This format allows users to navigate directly to the code location. 

D main-reminders-note.md 

# System Reminders Tool results and user messages may include `<system-reminder> ` tags containing useful information automatically added by the system. 

K.3 Thinking Mode Templates 

The thinking mode uses a separate prompt composition with a standalone wrapper template and 4 focused sections. These are deliberately minimal to avoid biasing tool-free reasoning toward premature action. 71 D thinking.md 

You are a thinker. Your responsibility is to analyze the current context and plan the next action using your reasoning capabilities. The full conversation history is provided to you. Based on this history, you must reason the current state of the task, the request of the user, try to re-interprete the request to make sure you understand it correctly, and provide your thoughts. Always analyze tool outputs, identify gaps, and decide if a task is concise enough for a direct tool call or complex enough (e.g., deep research, multi-file refactoring) to require 

`spawn_subagent `. Keep your thought process internal, concise (under 100 words) in 1 paragraph, dont use bullet points, and focused purely on the "why" and "what" of the next step. Most of the tasks will require context retrieval and reading, please think carefully about what files you need to read and what tools you need to use to get the context you need. If the task is large and require deep analyze, please prioritize thinking about spawning the Code Explorer subagent to explore the codebase deeply. Your reasoning trace should be concise and focused purely on the "why" and "what" of the next step. 

D thinking-available-tools.md 

# Available Tools Use this list to reason about what actions are possible. Suggest which tools to use in your reasoning. - **File Operations**: `read_file `, `write_file `, `edit_file `

- **Search & Navigation**: `list_files `, `search ` (regex/ast) - **Symbol Operations**: `find_symbol `, `find_referencing_symbols `,

`rename_symbol `

- **Command Execution**: `run_command `, `list_processes `, `kill_process `

- **Web**: `fetch_url `, `capture_web_screenshot `, `open_browser `,

`analyze_image `

- **MCP**: `search_tools ` (find tools by keyword then use them) - **Task Tracking**: `write_todos `, `update_todo `, `complete_todo `

- **Subagents**: `spawn_subagent(subagent_type, task) ` - Delegate complex tasks to specialized subagents (e.g., large features, deep research, multi-file refactoring). Don 't use for single file edits. 

D thinking-subagent-guide.md 

# Subagent Selection Guide When considering delegation to a subagent, reason through these questions: ## Which subagent matches the task? - **ask-user**: Need clarification on ambiguous requirements or user preferences? (e.g., which auth method, database choice) - **Code-Explorer**: Need to understand LOCAL codebase structure, find implementations, or trace patterns? - **Web-clone**: Need to replicate a website 's UI/design from a URL? - **Web-Generator**: Need to create a new web application from scratch? - **Planner**: Need to create a detailed implementation plan? Spawn a Planner subagent. ## Is a subagent appropriate? **YES, spawn a subagent when**: - Task requires specialized expertise - Task involves multiple files and complex coordination - Task requires deep codebase exploration with many searches - Task needs user input through structured questions - Task is isolated and can run in fresh context **NO, handle directly when**: - Single file edit or quick refactor - Simple grep/search operation - Reading one or two files - Running a single command - Quick answer from existing context ## Anti-patterns -- do NOT spawn a subagent when: - The task is creative/design work with no existing codebase to explore - The task doesn 't match ANY subagent 's purpose -- don 't force-fit - Code-Explorer is ONLY for LOCAL files that already exist ## Common patterns to recognize: ### Direct Tool Usage (Handle yourself): 

72 - "Read src/app.py" -> `read_file("src/app.py") `

- "Find function handleError" -> `search("def handleError", type="text") `

- "List all Python files" -> `list_files("**/*.py") `

- "Show me the package.json" -> `read_file("package.json") `

- "Run the tests" -> `run_command("pytest") `

- "Find all TODO comments" -> `search("TODO", type="text") `

- "What 's in the config?" -> `read_file ` on config file - "Create a utils file" -> `write_file ` with content ### Subagent Delegation (Spawn subagent): - "Clone this website" -> **Web-clone** - "Build a web app for X" -> **Web-Generator** - "How does authentication work?" -> **Code-Explorer** - "Understand the database schema" -> **Code-Explorer** - "What caching strategy is used?" -> **Code-Explorer** - "Plan adding real-time features" -> **Planner** subagent - "Which library should we use for X?" -> **ask-user** - "Implement user registration system" -> **Planner** first, then implement **Remember**: Subagent results aren 't shown to the user - you must summarize their findings in your reasoning and response. 

D thinking-code-references.md 

# Code References When referencing specific functions or code locations, include 

`file_path:line_number `:## Example 

``` 

user: Where are errors from the client handled? assistant: Clients are marked as failed in `connectToServer ` in src/services/process.ts:712. 

``` 

This format allows users to navigate directly to the code location. 

D thinking-output-rules.md 

# Output Rules However, if the user 's request are just simple greetings, random words, that has no relation to the context, you should just simply provide simple thinking, do not overthink, do not over-analyze, do not over-complicate. **Critical** - Never say "I 'll do X". - Always start with a sentence that highlights your reasoning, e.g., "Based on the context, I think..." or "The user wants..." or "I think...", depending on the context. - Never ask the user question, just show your thoughts - Never greet the user or say "Hi" or "Hello", just show your thoughts - If user just simply say "Hi" or "Hello", reasoning should be very short (1-2 sentences) - Never say "I understand" or "I get it" 

K.4 Specialized Standalone Templates 

These templates are loaded directly by their respective subsystems rather than through the PromptComposer 

auto-registration pipeline. 

D compaction.md 

You are a conversation compactor for an AI coding assistant called OpenDev. Your job is to compress a block of conversation messages into a structured summary that allows the assistant to seamlessly continue working as if no context was lost. # Process First, wrap your analysis in `<analysis> ` tags to reason about what matters before producing the summary. In your analysis: 1. Identify the user 's core objective and any refinements 2. List all critical technical details (file paths, function names, errors, decisions) 

73 3. Determine what is still relevant vs. what can be safely omitted 4. Identify the immediate next step Then produce the summary outside the tags. # Output Template You MUST produce your summary using EXACTLY the following template. Include every section header. If a section has no content, write "None." under it. 

``` 

## Objective <What the user is trying to accomplish, stated clearly in 1-3 sentences.> ## Key Decisions & Rationale - Decision: <what was decided> Rationale: <why> ## Technical Context ### Files Modified or Referenced - <file_path> -- <what was done or discussed about this file> ### Code Artifacts - Functions/classes created, modified, or referenced: <name> in <file_path:line> - Key code patterns or conventions observed ### Commands Executed & Results - `<command> ` -> <outcome (success/failure + key output)> ### Dependencies & Environment - Language/framework versions, packages installed, config changes ## User Messages <Preserve ALL non-tool-result user messages verbatim or near-verbatim.> ## Progress Tracker - [x] <completed step> - [ ] <remaining step> ## Open Issues & Errors - <error message or issue> -> <resolution status> - If resolved: <how it was resolved> - If unresolved: <last attempted fix, what to try next> ## Working State <Describe the exact state of the workspace when the conversation was paused.> ## Next Step <The IMMEDIATE next action to take.> 

``` 

# Rules ## What to PRESERVE (high priority) - The user 's original objective and any refinements to it - ALL file paths, function names, class names, variable names, and line numbers - Exact error messages and stack traces that are still relevant - Decisions and their rationale -- never drop the "why" - Tool call results that produced actionable information - Configuration values, environment variables, API keys (redacted) - Any constraints or requirements the user specified - The current progress state -- what is done vs. what remains - All user messages that contain instructions or requirements ## What to OMIT (low priority) - Greetings, acknowledgments, and filler - Intermediate reasoning that led to a dead end - Redundant tool calls (keep only the final state) - Verbose tool output when a short summary captures the essential info - Repetitive back-and-forth that can be collapsed ## Formatting Rules - Use Markdown formatting consistently - Use backticks for all code references - Keep the total summary under 800 words - Use present tense for current state, past tense for completed actions 

74 D critique.md 

You are a reasoning critic for an AI software engineering assistant. Your task is to analyze thinking traces and provide constructive feedback to improve the reasoning quality. # Input Format You will receive a thinking trace that represents the AI 's reasoning about a software engineering task. Analyze this reasoning critically. # Critique Guidelines Evaluate the thinking trace for: 1. **Logical Coherence**: Are there gaps, contradictions, or faulty logic in the reasoning? 2. **Completeness**: Are important considerations, edge cases, or requirements being overlooked? 3. **Assumptions**: Are there implicit assumptions that should be validated or questioned? 4. **Tool/Approach Selection**: Is the proposed approach optimal? Are there better alternatives? 5. **Risk Assessment**: Are potential issues, errors, or unintended consequences addressed? # Output Format Provide your critique in a concise format (under 100 words): - Focus on actionable improvements - Be specific about what 's wrong and how to fix it - If the reasoning is sound, say so briefly - Do NOT re-explain the task or provide a new solution - Do NOT be overly positive or use filler phrases # Example Critiques Good critique: "The reasoning assumes the file exists without checking. Should verify with list_files first. Also, editing multiple files without a backup plan risks data loss - consider using undo tracking." Good critique (when reasoning is sound): "Reasoning is sound. The step-by-step file exploration before editing is appropriate for this refactoring task." Bad critique (too vague): "The reasoning could be better. Consider more options." Bad critique (too long/re-explains): "The user wants to add a feature. The AI should first read the file, then understand the code, then make changes..." 

D init.md 

Analyze the codebase at {path} and generate a comprehensive OPENDEV.md that serves as the definitive reference for any AI agent or developer working in this repository. Use spawn_subagent with Code-Explorer: "Explore {path} thoroughly. Read ALL config files (package.json, pyproject.toml, setup.py, setup.cfg, Makefile, Dockerfile, Cargo.toml, go.mod, etc.), README, and any CI/CD configs (.github/workflows/, .gitlab-ci.yml). Also read 2-3 core source files to understand the architecture. Report: project name, description, tech stack, all available commands (install, run, test, lint, build, deploy), main directories with purposes, architecture layers, key design patterns, code style conventions, and any testing requirements." After exploration, use write_file to create {path}/OPENDEV.md with this format: 

``` 

# OPENDEV.md This file provides guidance when working with code in this repository. ## Build & Development Commands 

``` bash # Install dependencies <actual install command> 

75 # Run the application <actual run command(s)> # Code quality <actual lint/format/typecheck commands> # Tests <actual test commands: all tests, single file, single test, with coverage> 

``` 

## Architecture Overview 

``` 

<ASCII diagram showing the main layers/components> Entry Point (file.ext) |Layer 1 (directory/) - component: description |Layer 2 (directory/) - component: description 

``` 

## Key Patterns **Pattern Name** ( `relevant_file.ext `): Brief explanation. ## Code Style - Line length, formatter, linter used - Naming conventions - Import ordering - Docstring style 

``` 

CRITICAL RULES: - Use REAL commands discovered from config files -- never guess - If a section has no applicable content, omit it entirely - Architecture diagram should reflect the ACTUAL directory structure - Keep descriptions concise -- max 500 words total - Format all file paths, commands, and code references with backticks 

76 Table 1: Complete catalog of built-in tools in O PEN DEV (organized by handler category). Tools marked with † are read-only and available in plan mode. 

Category Tool Description 

File Ops 

read_file † Read file contents with line-numbered output and optional offset/limit 

write_file Create new files (rejects overwrites; directs to edit_file )

edit_file Apply targeted edits via 9-pass fuzzy matching chain 

list_files † Directory listing and glob-based file search 

search † Dual-mode search: regex (ripgrep) or structural (ast-grep) Process 

run_command Execute shell commands with auto-background for servers 

list_processes † List tracked background tasks with status and runtime 

get_process_output † Retrieve last 100 lines from a back-ground task 

kill_process Terminate a running task (SIGTERM → SIGKILL esca-lation) Web 

fetch_url † Browser-engine web fetching with deep crawl support 

web_search † Privacy-respecting web search via DuckDuckGo 

capture_web_screenshot † Full-page screenshot via Play-wright headless browser 

open_browser † Open URL or local file in system default browser Symbols (LSP) 

find_symbol † Find symbol definitions with wild-card matching 

find_referencing_symbols † Find all references to a symbol across files 

rename_symbol Rename a symbol across all refer-ences 

replace_symbol_body Replace function/method body preserving signature 

insert_before_symbol Insert code before a symbol defini-tion 

insert_after_symbol Insert code after a symbol defini-tion Visual capture_screenshot † Capture desktop screenshot with optional region 

analyze_image † Analyze images via vision lan-guage model PDF read_pdf † Extract text and metadata from PDF files Notebooks notebook_edit Create, modify, or delete Jupyter notebook cells Task Mgmt 

write_todos Create or replace the task list 

update_todo Update a task by ID (enforces sin-gle “doing” constraint) 

complete_todo Mark a task as done with optional completion log 

list_todos † List all tasks sorted by status prior-ity User Input ask_user † Present structured multi-choice questions to the user Discovery search_tools † Search MCP tools by keyword with scored ranking Batch batch_tool Execute multiple tools in parallel or serial mode Subagents spawn_subagent Launch isolated subagent with fil-

77 Table 2: Supported LSP language servers in O PEN DEV . Servers marked with † are experimental and must be explicitly specified. Alternative servers for the same language (e.g., Jedi for Python, Solargraph for Ruby) are omitted. 

Language Server Language Server 

Python Pyright Perl Perl::LanguageServer TypeScript/JS tsserver Clojure clojure-lsp Rust rust-analyzer Elm elm-language-server Go gopls Terraform terraform-ls Java Eclipse JDT LS Bash bash-language-server C/C++ clangd Nix nixd C# csharp-ls Erlang erlang_ls Ruby Ruby LSP AL AL Language Extension PHP Intelephense Rego Regal Swift SourceKit-LSP Fortran fortls Kotlin kotlin-language-server OCaml ocamllsp Lua lua-language-server Markdown † Marksman Elixir ElixirLS YAML † yaml-language-server Haskell haskell-language-server Dart dart analyze Scala Metals Zig zls Julia LanguageServer.jl R languageserver 

78 Table 3: Complete registry of main agent prompt sections (21 sections). Conditions: always = unconditional; others evaluate a runtime context predicate. Cache: whether the section is included in the stable (cacheable) partition for Anthropic prompt caching. 

Section Condition Cache Summary 

mode-awareness always ✓ Guides planner subagent usage for non-trivial tasks security-policy always ✓ Authorized security testing bound-aries tone-and-style always ✓ Communication standards: concise, direct, no emojis no-time-estimates always ✓ Never provide duration estimates interaction-pattern always ✓ ReAct loop: Think → Act → Ob-serve → Complete available-tools always ✓ Tool category overview and descrip-tions tool-selection always ✓ When to use direct tools vs. sub-agents code-quality always ✓ Follow conventions, minimal changes, no scope creep action-safety always ✓ Risk assessment for destructive/irre-versible actions read-before-edit always ✓ Always read files before editing error-recovery always ✓ Error pattern → resolution strategy mapping subagent-guide has_subagents ✓ Subagent reference: 8 types with when/how guidance git-workflow in_git_repo ✓ Git safety protocol, commit/PR workflows task-tracking todo_enabled ✓ Todo lifecycle: create → in_progress 

→ complete provider-openai openai ✓ Function calling, reasoning models, vision format provider-anthropic anthropic ✓ Tool_use blocks, extended thinking, cache control provider-fireworks fireworks ✓ Smaller contexts, fast inference, no thinking output-awareness always ✓ Tool output truncation limits and pagination scratchpad session_id set ✗ Session-specific scratch directory path code-references always ✓ file_path:line_number format for navigation reminders-note always ✗ Explains <system-reminder> tags 

Table 4: Thinking mode prompt sections (4 sections). All are unconditional and cacheable. 

Section Summary 

thinking-available-tools Tool awareness without invocation pressure thinking-subagent-guide Delegation reasoning: when and which sub-agent thinking-code-references Code reference format for navigation thinking-output-rules No actions, only reasoning; concise trace (≤100 words) 

79 Table 5: Specialized prompt templates (not auto-registered). 

Template Role Key Output 

compaction.md Conversation compactor Structured summary ( ≤800 words) with artifact index 

critique.md Reasoning critic Actionable feedback on thinking traces (≤100 words) 

init.md Session initializer OPENDEV.md generation via Code-Explorer 

main.md Core identity wrapper Senior engineer persona with full tool access 

thinking.md Thinking wrapper Concise internal reasoning trace ( ≤100 words) 

Table 6: Server detection patterns for automatic background promotion.                                   

> #Regex Pattern Framework
> 1flask\s+run Flask 2python.*app\.py Generic Python app 3python.*manage\.py\s+runserver Django (manage.py) 4django.*runserver Django (direct) 5uvicorn Uvicorn (ASGI) 6gunicorn Gunicorn (WSGI) 7python.*-m\s+http\.server Python http.server 8npm\s+(run\s+)?(start|dev|serve) npm 9yarn\s+(run\s+)?(start|dev|serve) Yarn 10 node.*server Node.js 11 nodemon Nodemon 12 next\s+(dev|start) Next.js 13 rails\s+server Ruby on Rails 14 php.*artisan\s+serve Laravel 15 hugo\s+server Hugo 16 jekyll\s+serve Jekyll

Table 7: Subagent types with tool access and use cases. Tool counts reflect the filtered registry; the main agent has access to all 35 built-in tools. 

Subagent Tools Available Use Case 

Code-Explorer read_file, search, list_files, find_symbol, find_referencing_symbols Deep codebase exploration, ar-chitectural analysis, pattern dis-covery Planner All read-only + write_file, edit_file, spawn_subagent, ask_user, task_complete Implementation planning with codebase analysis and plan file writing PR-Reviewer read_file, search, list_files, find_symbol, find_referencing_symbols, run_command Pull request code review, diff analysis, pre-merge review Security-Reviewer read_file, search, list_files, find_symbol, find_referencing_symbols, run_command Security audits, vulnerability as-sessment, severity/confidence scoring Web-Clone capture_web_screenshot, ana-lyze_image, write_file, read_file, run_command, list_files Visual website analysis and UI replication Web-Generator write_file, edit_file, run_command, list_files, read_file Create web applications from specifications (React/TypeScrip-t/Tailwind) Project-Init read_file, search, list_files, run_command, write_file Generate OPENDEV.md project instruction files from codebase analysis Ask-User (none; UI only) Present structured multi-choice surveys; bypasses LLM execu-tion 

80 Table 8: Key configuration fields in O PEN DEV .

Field Type Description 

model str LLM model identifier 

provider str API provider (openai, azure, etc.) 

max_context_tokens int Max context window size 

temperature float LLM sampling temperature 

max_tokens int Max response tokens 

thinking_model str Model for thinking phase 

thinking_provider str Provider for thinking model 

auto_approve bool Skip approval dialogs 

web_search_provider str Web search backend 

mcp_servers dict MCP server configurations 

blocked_commands list Additional blocked shell commands 

Table 9: Implementation constants in O PEN DEV with justification. 

Constant Value Rationale 

Compaction stages 70/80/90/99% Four graduated thresholds: warn, mask, aggressive mask, full compaction Max undo history 50 ops Bounded growth prevents OOM in long sessions Max nudge attempts 3 Balance recovery opportunity vs. forc-ing progress Doom-loop threshold 3 repeats Same (tool, args) fingerprint 3 × in slid-ing window triggers warning Doom-loop window 20 calls Sliding window of recent tool call finger-prints Thinking levels 4 (OFF–HIGH) OFF, LOW, MEDIUM, HIGH (includes self-critique) Edit fuzzy passes 9 Chain-of-responsibility (Section D) Tool output offload 8,000 chars Written to scratch files; 500-char preview retained Observation masking 6/3 recent Full-fidelity outputs at 80%/90% com-paction Subagent iteration limit 15 Bounds exploration while allowing thor-ough investigation Max concurrent tools 5 Balances parallelism overhead vs. uti-lization Session ID length 8 chars Human-readable, 62 8 unique values Provider cache TTL 24 hours Balance staleness vs. network calls Summary regeneration Every 5 msgs Amortizes cost, prevents drift accumu-lation Recent message tail 3–10 msgs Adaptive based on conversation length Max tool result length 300 tokens Prevents context pollution from verbose output 

81