Title: Can AI Agents Answer Your Data Questions? A Benchmark for Data Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20576v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:24:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Can AI Agents Answer Your Data Questions? A Benchmark for Data Agents 

# Ruiying Ma 1†, Shreya Shankar 1†, Ruiqi Chen 2, Yiming Lin 1, Sepanta Zeighami 1, Rajoshi Ghosh 3,Abhinav Gupta 3, Anushrut Gupta 3, Tanmai Gopal 3, Aditya G. Parameswaran 1

> 1

UC Berkeley, 2University of Washington, 3Hasura PromptQL 

## ABSTRACT 

Users across enterprises increasingly rely on AI agents to query their data through natural language. However, building reliable data agents remains difficult because real-world data is often fragmented across multiple heterogeneous database systems, with inconsistent references and information buried in unstructured text. Existing benchmarks only tackle individual pieces of this problem—e.g., translating natural-language questions into SQL queries, answer-ing questions over small tables provided in context—but do not evaluate the full pipeline of integrating, transforming, and ana-lyzing data across multiple database systems. To fill this gap, we present the Data Agent Benchmark (DAB ), grounded in a formative study of enterprise data agent workloads across six industries. DAB 

comprises 54 queries across 12 datasets, 9 domains, and 4 database management systems. On DAB , the best frontier model (Gemini-3-Pro) achieves only 38% pass@1 accuracy. We benchmark five frontier LLMs, analyze their failure modes, and distill takeaways for future data agent development. Our benchmark and experiment code are published at github.com/ucbepic/DataAgentBench .

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Users across enterprises increasingly want data agents , or AI agents that answer natural-language questions over their data. Database vendors have begun adding agent capabilities to their platforms [ 12 ,41 ], and organizations are investing heavily in building their own: for example, Uber’s QueryGPT handles over 1.2 million interactive queries per month [ 44 ], and OpenAI built an internal data agent used by thousands of employees to query 70,000 datasets total-ing 600 petabytes [ 45 ]. Yet building reliable data agents remains difficult, because enterprise data is typically fragmented across mul-tiple databases—surveys find that 72% of organizations store data in disparate silos [ 42 ] and 82% report that these silos disrupt critical workflows [ 17 ]—and answering a single question often requires integrating and reasoning across several of them. For example, con-sider a sales analyst who asks, “Which leads from last quarter should we follow up on?” Answering this requires finding lead records in a customer relationship management (CRM) tool, matching them against call transcripts stored in a separate document database, classifying each lead’s intent from unstructured text, and applying domain knowledge about what makes a lead good to pursue—all within a single agent session. Currently, no benchmark measures end-to-end data agent capabil-ities. For example, text-to-SQL benchmarks [ 8, 25 , 26 ] test whether LLMs can translate a natural-language question into a single cor-rect query over a single relational database, but do not require 

> †Co-first authors. Corresponding authors: {shreyashankar,adityagp} @berkeley.edu.

multi-step reasoning or integration across different databases. Or, table question-answering (i.e., Table-QA) benchmarks [ 9, 10 ] test reasoning over tables provided directly in the prompt, but produc-tion tables rarely fit in context and must be queried from databases directly. Overall, without an end-to-end benchmark, we cannot systematically identify where data agents fail or what capabilities most need improvement. 

A New Benchmark for Data Agents. To this end, we present Data Agent Benchmark ( DAB ), the first benchmark for evaluating AI agents on realistic, complex data-oriented tasks. To ensure DAB 

reflects production workloads, we conducted a formative study of query patterns from enterprise customers of PromptQL [ 36 ]—an organization building a production data agent—across six industries (technology, finance, food services, e-commerce, SaaS, and health-care). We collected example queries that users posed to data agents, along with descriptions of their schemas, the database systems they used, and how their data was organized across them. From this study, we identified four properties that consistently make real-world data queries difficult and that are unaddressed by existing benchmarks: (i) multi-database integration : a single question may require querying across several databases with different query languages dialects (e.g., SQL dialects and MongoDB’s query lan-guage); (ii) ill-formatted join keys : identifiers for the same entity may differ across databases—e.g., through inconsistent prefixes, trailing whitespace, or abbreviated names—requiring the agent to detect and reconcile mismatches before joining; (iii) unstructured text transformation : answers may be embedded in text fields that the agent must parse into structured values before they can be fil-tered, grouped, or joined; and (iv) domain knowledge : answering the query correctly requires expertise not inferable from the data alone, such as knowing that stock volatility must be computed from adjusted closing prices to account for splits and dividends. Translating the aforementioned properties into a reproducible benchmark required careful design. Our benchmark, DAB , com-prises 54 natural-language queries across 12 datasets, span-ning 9 domains and 4 database management systems (DBM-Ses). Since enterprise data from the formative study is proprietary, we build DAB from open-source datasets across domains that match those observed in the formative study. These datasets are not inher-ently messy—the challenge was to systematically perturb them so that they exhibit the same characteristics we observed in produc-tion. For each dataset, we distribute data across at least two database systems (from PostgreSQL, MongoDB, SQLite, or DuckDB), mir-roring how users in the formative study organize their data across heterogeneous backends. We then induce the remaining properties by often removing columns that would trivially answer a query and preserving their values in other forms that require more work    

> arXiv:2603.20576v1 [cs.DB] 21 Mar 2026 (a) DAB setup. (b) Example agent trace.

Figure 1: (a) In DAB , an agent solves a user task by interacting with database querying and Python execution tools within a ReAct-style loop. (b) In this example, the agent operates over unstructured text (i.e., extracting language from the details column in the 3rd tool call) and integrates data across different databases (PostgreSQL and SQLite) by reconciling the ill-formatted join keys (i.e., bref and bid , in the 5th tool call). 

to recover: reformatting join keys so that identifiers for the same entity differ across databases, and embedding structured attribute values into free-text fields that the agent must parse. Getting these perturbations right—realistic enough to be challenging, yet preserv-ing deterministic ground-truth answers derived from the original data (not from LLM-generated or human judgments)—required sub-stantial manual effort across all 12 datasets. Every query, answer, and dataset is verified by the authors. The size of DAB is compa-rable to other carefully curated and widely-adopted benchmarks (e.g., FrontierMath [13], TerminalBench [30]). 

Evaluating Frontier LLM Agents on DAB. Then, to characterize how agents perform on DAB , we evaluate a mix of proprietary and open-source frontier LLMs—GPT-5.2, GPT-5-mini, Gemini-3-Pro, Gemini-2.5-Flash, and Kimi-K2—using the ReAct pattern; a state-of-the-art agent architecture in which the model iteratively reasons about what to do next, issues a tool call (e.g., a database query or Python script), observes the result, and decides on the next ac-tion [ 48 ]. Each agent is equipped with tools for listing the databases available, executing queries against them, running Python code, and returning a final answer. An example agent trajectory is de-picted in Figure 1. For each query, we run 50 independent trials per agent and measure accuracy using pass@ 𝑘 [7], an estimate of the probability that at least one of 𝑘 attempts succeeds. Unfortunately, the accuracy results are sobering. The best agent (Gemini-3-Pro) 

achieves only 38% pass@1 , and even its pass@50—the probability that any of 50 attempts yields a correct answer—does not exceed 69%. One dataset is completely unsolved: no agent answers any of its queries correctly across all trials. Our evaluation yields several insights into agent behavior. Agents that explore schemas and data too little or too much both under-perform: the two highest-accuracy agents each allocate roughly 20% of their tool calls to data exploration. Then, our error analysis reveals that 85% of wrong answers stem from incorrect planning or faulty implementation, while agents rarely select the wrong data sources. Every agent uses regular expressions for extracting struc-tured values from free text, and no agent attempts NLP-based or LLM-based text extraction. Our results point to opportunities for improvement in agent accuracy: for example, agent frameworks can surface richer extraction primitives alongside SQL and Python, and semantic layers can reduce the planning burden on the agent. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: (1) We characterize real-world data-agent workloads based on pat-terns observed in a production platform, identifying four prop-erties that make them substantially more complex than text-to-SQL or table question-answering queries. (2) We present DAB , a benchmark of 54 queries across 12 datasets and 4 database systems designed to evaluate data agents on these properties. (3) We evaluate agents powered by five LLMs and find that even the best model achieves only 38% pass@1. We develop a failure taxonomy over agent traces. We distill actionable takeaways around cost-efficiency, data exploration strategies, and extrac-tion tool design. (4) We conduct a case study with PromptQL [ 36 ], a proprietary production data agent, and find that it improves pass@1 by 7 percentage points over the ReAct baseline with the same model, though both approaches fail entirely on queries requiring ex-traction from unstructured text. 

> 2

Figure 2: Dataset creation methodology, illustrated on the 

bookreview dataset. Step 1: collect an open-source dataset with two tables, books_info and reviews . Step 2: transform the data by removing publishedDate and publisher and re-embedding their values into a new details column via LLM-generated sentences, and by prefixing the join keys ( id → bid , 

> book_id

→ bref ). Step 3: distribute the tables across Post-greSQL and SQLite. Step 4: create a dataset description (descriptions.txt ) and a hints file ( hints.txt ). 

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 details the formative study and construction of DAB ; Section 3 eval-uates five frontier LLMs and analyzes agent failures; and Section 4 discusses related work. 

## 2 BENCHMARK CONSTRUCTION 

We describe a formative study in Section 2.1, detail the data agent benchmark construction process in Section 2.2, and present bench-mark statistics and an example walk-through in Section 2.3. 

## 2.1 Formative Study 

Our formative study was conducted in collaboration with Hasura, the company behind the PromptQL data agent platform [ 36 ]. Ha-sura’s earlier product, the Hasura GraphQL Engine, has surpassed one billion downloads and is used by over half of the Fortune 100 to deliver real-time data APIs. PromptQL extends this data-access infrastructure to AI-powered agents that query, analyze, and act on enterprise data through natural language. It connects to het-erogeneous sources—including PostgreSQL, Snowflake, BigQuery, MongoDB, MySQL, and SaaS tools—and has deployments reaching tens of thousands of users and petabyte-scale data volumes. We grounded our benchmark design in a qualitative study of production query patterns. Co-authors from Hasura conducted semi-structured interviews with enterprise customers across six in-dustries (technology, finance, food services, e-commerce, SaaS, and healthcare), collecting example queries that users posed to their data agents along with descriptions of the underlying schemas, database systems, and how the data was distributed across the databases. Co-authors from both Berkeley and Hasura then per-formed a thematic analysis [ 11 ], a widely used qualitative method in HCI research for identifying recurring patterns. That is, they independently reviewed and identified codes (i.e., themes) for the collected queries and schemas, then iteratively grouped codes into higher-level categories through discussion until consensus, surfac-ing four themes: 

(C1) Multi-database integration. Queries require combining information from multiple databases or systems. We distinguish four sub-themes based on how joins are performed across sources: 

(a) exact-match joins, where identifiers match one-to-one across sources; (b) programmatic-transform joins, where identifiers re-fer to the same entity but differ in format and can be reconciled via deterministic rules (e.g., mapping a numeric ID in one sys-tem to a prefixed string in another); (c) fuzzy joins , where entity resolution is required to match records across sources using ap-proximate string matching or contextual reasoning (e.g., recon-ciling abbreviated and full company names across a CRM and an internal database); and (d) API integration , where relevant data re-sides not in databases but in external APIs (e.g., email clients, web search endpoints, third-party data providers) that must be queried alongside database sources. The most common backends observed were Snowflake, PostgreSQL, MySQL, MongoDB, SQL Server, and DuckDB, alongside external APIs (email clients, web search, and third-party data providers such as Caplight and Dealroom). 

(C2) Semantic operations over text. Queries often require pro-cessing text fields using semantic operators —i.e., LLM-powered transformations applied to individual rows of a table [ 21 , 29 , 34 , 40 ]. Sub-themes include: (a) classification (e.g., labeling support tickets as production vs. non-production issues from their descriptions), 

(b) extraction (e.g., parsing version numbers or integration names from ticket text), (c) clustering (e.g., grouping tickets by recurring themes to identify systemic issues), (d) generation and summariza-tion (e.g., drafting responses to tickets or producing performance reports), and (e) search over large corpora based on meaning rather than exact keyword matches; e.g., finding relevant documentation or resolved tickets for an error. 

(C3) Domain knowledge. Queries require domain-specific exper-tise not inferable from database schemas or content alone. More-over, customers have their own company-specific definitions of business concepts—e.g., a “power user” might mean users above the 80th percentile in feature usage who manage multiple projects and log in frequently—and expect the agent to apply these definitions correctly. 

(C4) Open-ended analytical reasoning. Queries are often ex-ploratory, requiring the agent to formulate its own analytical ap-proach rather than follow a well-defined specification. For instance, customers asked questions like“What should I do to improve my support process?” or “What do my top support agents do that lower-performing agents should also be doing?” Such queries require the 

> 3

Table 1: Overview of datasets and queries in DAB . #DK: number of queries requiring domain knowledge, as in property (iv).                                                                     

> Dataset #DBs DBMSes #Tables #Queries #DK Example Query
> agnews 2MongoDB, SQLite 340What is the title of the sports article whose description has the greatest number of characters?
> bookreview 2PostgreSQL, SQLite 230Which English-language books in the ‘Literature & Fiction’ category have a perfect average rating of 5.0?
> crmarenapro 6DuckDB, Post-greSQL, SQLite 27 13 10 Which states have the quickest case closure time in the past 6 quarters?
> (Assume today’s date is 2022-10-26)
> deps_dev_v1 2DuckDB, SQLite 322Among all NPM packages with license ‘MIT’ marked as release, which 5 have the highest GitHub fork count?
> github_repos 2DuckDB, SQLite 644Among repos not using Python, what proportion of README.md files include copyright information?
> googlelocal 2PostgreSQL, SQLite 240What are the top 5 businesses in Los Angeles, CA, ranked by highest average rating?
> music_brainz_20k 2DuckDB, SQLite 230Which store earned the most USD revenue from Brucqe Maginnis’ song ‘Street Hype’ across all countries?
> pancancer_atlas 2DuckDB, Post-greSQL 333Among alive BRCA patients, which top 3 histological types show the highest % of CDH1 gene mutations?
> patents 2PostgreSQL, SQLite 233Identify CPC areas with the highest EMA of patent filings (smoothing 0.2); return level-5 codes whose best year is 2022.
> stockindex 2DuckDB, SQLite 233Which stock index in Asia has the highest average intraday volatility since 2020?
> stockmarket 2DuckDB, SQLite 2754 55List all ETFs on NYSE Arca with adjusted close above $200 at any point in 2015; report the total count.
> yelp 2DuckDB, Mon-goDB 570During 2018, how many reviewed businesses offered either business parking or bike parking?

agent to autonomously select relevant metrics, identify patterns across data sources, and synthesize actionable recommendations. There is no single correct answer. 

From themes to benchmark properties. Given that the under-lying customer data from the formative study is proprietary, we construct our benchmark, DAB (the Data Agent Benchmark), from open-source datasets whose queries mirror the patterns observed in the formative study. We require every query to have a deterministic ground-truth answer for reproducible evaluation, which leads us to drop C4 (open-ended reasoning) and C1d (API integration, since live APIs return different results on each invocation). From the remaining themes, we derive four benchmark proper-ties, each corresponding to a challenge we deliberately induce in our queries: (i) multi-database integration (from C1); (ii) ill-formatted join keys (from C1b–c), requiring the agent to detect and reconcile identifier mismatches across tables; (iii) unstructured text transfor-mation (from C2), requiring the agent to extract or infer structured values from free-text fields; and (iv) domain knowledge (from C3), requiring expertise beyond what schemas provide. Every query in DAB involves (i) and at least one of (ii) or (iii); (iv) appears in proportion to its prevalence in the formative study. 

## 2.2 Construction Methodology 

We describe how we create datasets from open-source data (Sec-tion 2.2.1), and formulate queries with ground-truth answers and verify benchmark quality (Section 2.2.2). 

2.2.1 Dataset Creation. Dataset creation has four steps, illustrated in Figure 2: (1) collect open-source datasets across diverse domains; (2) transform the data to induce properties (ii) and (iii); (3) distribute tables across multiple database systems to induce property (i); and (4) provide each dataset with a natural-language description and hints (described below). We collect 12 open-source datasets, as listed in Table 1, cov-ering diverse domains including news articles ( agnews ) [ 50 ], e-commerce ( bookreview ) [ 1], customer relationship management and sales operations ( crmarenapro ) [ 15 ], software engineering (deps_dev_v1 , github_repos ) [ 4, 14 ], local business and reviews (googlelocal , yelp ) [ 18 , 27 , 46 ], music ( music_brainz_20k ) [ 38 , 39 ], financial markets ( stockindex , stockmarket ) [ 32 ], medical research (pancancer_atlas ) [ 37 ], and patents and intellectual property ( patents ) [ 3]. The crmarenapro dataset and its queries are drawn from the CR-MArena benchmark [ 15 ]; all remaining datasets are sourced from public repositories, with all remaining queries formulated by us. To induce properties (ii) and (iii), we transform each dataset by removing columns that would trivially answer a query and “re-embedding” their contents into other columns, requiring non-trivial recovery. For join keys (ii), we replace matching identifiers across tables with differently formatted versions (e.g., 123 becomes bid_123 

in one table and bref_123 in the other), forcing the agent to detect and reconcile mismatches. For text transformation (iii), we remove category or label columns and embed their values into free-text fields such as reviews or descriptions, using GPT-4o to find a natural insertion point (prompted to “transform {review_text} to naturally include a reference to {value}; change as little as possible”). For instance, in yelp , restaurant locations are injected into review text, requiring agents to extract them from prose rather than reading a dedicated column. Our text transformations fall into two categories. 

Data-independent transformations can be resolved by fixed-size pro-grams regardless of data cardinality. For example, in github_repos ,the number of GitHub stars is embedded in a free-text description 

> 4

and can be extracted with a regular expression like (\d+) stars ;in bookreview , a book’s language appears in a natural-language  

> details

field and can be identified with LIKE ‘%English%’ . In both cases, a single pattern applies uniformly to every row. Then, data-dependent transformations require the agent to examine individual rows, since no fixed set of rules suffices—for example, categorizing a sales lead’s intent requires inspecting each lead individually. The types of transformations we apply are drawn directly from exam-ples observed in the formative study: enterprise customers reported identifier formats that varied across systems (e.g., numeric IDs in one database, prefixed strings in another) and structured attributes embedded in free-text fields (e.g., product categories appearing only in ticket descriptions). Our transformations replicate these patterns, though they are necessarily stylized—the enterprise data from our formative study cannot be released, so the corruption patterns we inject approximate the messier real-world variants. Then, for each dataset, to meet property (i), we distribute data across at least two different DBMSes, with at least one table per database (Table 1), mirroring the heterogeneous patterns observed in the formative study (Section 2.1), where the most common DBM-Ses were PostgreSQL, MongoDB, DuckDB, MySQL, Snowflake, and SQL Server. We place unstructured and customer-facing data (e.g., documents, user profiles, reviews) in MongoDB, and structured data (e.g., sales records, stock prices, metadata) in DuckDB, Post-greSQL, or SQLite. We restrict ourselves to open-source systems to ensure DAB can be run without commercial licenses. As a result, agents must reconcile both schema and query dialect differences— MongoDB’s query language differs substantially from SQL, and even among SQL systems, dialects vary (e.g., PostgreSQL requires double quotes for case-sensitive column names, whereas SQLite and DuckDB do not). Finally, for each dataset, we create two text files that accompany every query. The first is a natural-language description specifying each database’s logical name, system type, and schema (table names, column names, types, and brief descriptions). The second is a hints file describing the transformations applied during dataset creation (e.g., that fuzzy matching is needed for reformatted identifiers, or the candidate categories for classification). These hints need not be provided to agents—in a real deployment, users would rarely supply such detailed guidance. We include them to test whether agents can perform better when given additional assistance, and to separate failures caused by missing context from failures caused by inadequate reasoning or implementation. Both description and hint files are dataset-level: they remain identical across all queries within the same dataset. Property (iv), domain knowledge, arises both from our choice of specialized domains and from domain-specific definitions we encode in the hints. For example, queries over stockindex and stockmarket require financial expertise (e.g., computing intraday volatility, mapping exchanges to index sym-bols), pancancer_atlas requires medical and genomics knowledge, and crmarenapro requires familiarity with customer relationship management (CRM) and sales operations. In each case, the hints specify the domain concepts the agent must apply (e.g., the formula for a particular metric, or the mapping between entity names and standard abbreviations). 

2.2.2 Query Formulation. Each query consists of a natural-language question, a ground-truth answer, and a validation script. Each query incorporates at least two of the four properties defined in Section 2.1 and induced during dataset creation, and is formulated to mirror patterns collected in the formative study. We derive ground-truth answers from the original dataset (i.e., before any transformations were applied) by having two authors co-write Python code to compute each answer. Because agents return free-form text rather than structured values, each validation script takes the agent’s answer as input and returns true or false by checking whether the ground truth appears within it: for a single-valued answer (e.g., a book title), the ground-truth string must appear as a substring of the agent’s response; for set-valued answers (e.g., a list of book titles), every element must appear. A limitation of this approach is that it favors recall over precision: an agent that returns correct values alongside incorrect ones still passes. Checking for extraneous incorrect values would require either manual inspection of every trajectory or an LLM-based judge, both of which undermine the fully deterministic evaluation that 

DAB is designed to provide. We verify DAB in two ways: one author manually inspected all queries, descriptions, and hints for integrity, and the Hasura Promp-tQL team independently reran the queries and verified accuracy in our validation scripts. 

## 2.3 Benchmark Statistics and Example Walk-Through 

Table 1 lists the 12 datasets with their database systems and table counts, query counts (see Table 9 for all queries), and a represen-tative query. We report query-level statistics with respect to the four benchmark properties in Section 2.3.1, then walk through a concrete dataset and query in Section 2.3.2. 

2.3.1 Query Statistics. We report query-level statistics with respect to the four benchmark properties. 

Multi-database integration. All 54 queries require joining data across multiple databases. At the extremes, crmarenapro queries span up to six databases across three systems (DuckDB, PostgreSQL, and SQLite), and stockmarket queries must navigate 2,754 tables— one table per traded security. 

Ill-formatted join keys. 26 queries involve joining tables with ill-formatted join keys. Specifically, queries under bookreview and yelp 

require joining identifiers with different formats (e.g., bid_123 vs. 

> bref_123

); queries under crmarenapro involve corrupted join keys, where 25% of ID fields contain randomly added trailing spaces (e.g., “Lead123 ” vs. “ Lead123 ”), requiring the agent to clean them before join; and queries under stockindex require a semantic mapping between full stock exchange names and abbreviated index symbols for join (e.g., matching “Tokyo Stock Exchange” with “N225”). 

Unstructured text transformation. 47 of 54 queries require transforming unstructured text into structured values for down-stream processing (e.g., filtering or joining). Of these, 31 are data-independent, spanning bookreview , deps_dev_v1 , github_repos ,

googlelocal , pancancer_atlas , patents , stockmarket , and yelp . These queries require extracting values such as timestamps, languages, and locations from free-text fields using fixed patterns that apply 

> 5

uniformly regardless of data cardinality. We also classify stock-market ’s entity-to-symbol mappings (e.g., NASDAQ Global Select Market → Q) as data-independent, since the mapping is one-to-one, covers fewer than twenty entries, and is provided in the hints. The remaining 16 queries are data-dependent: agnews requires classifying each article’s content; crmarenapro includes six queries requiring inference of CRM relationships from raw records; mu-sic_brainz_20k requires entity resolution across album names, re-lease dates, and artists; and stockindex requires mapping exchange names to abbreviations. Unlike the fixed symbol table in stockmar-ket , stockindex has too many exchange names to enumerate in the hints, so the agent must infer each mapping (e.g., “Tokyo Stock Exchange” → “N225”) at query time. 

Domain knowledge. 30 queries require domain expertise beyond database schemas. These include queries under crmarenapro , which require an understanding of CRM and sales operations; queries un-der pancancer_atlas , which require medical and genomics expertise; queries under patents , which require intellectual property expertise; queries under stockindex and stockmarket , which require finan-cial knowledge; and queries under github_repos and deps_dev_v1 ,which require software engineering expertise. 

2.3.2 Example Walk-Through. We illustrate DAB ’s structure using the bookreview dataset, which spans two databases across two systems. Each dataset ships with three artifacts. First, a YAML configuration file specifies the database setup. The agent sees only the logical database names (e.g., books_database , review_database ); physical paths and connection details are hidden behind the tools:         

> 1db_clients:
> 2books_database:
> 3db_type: postgres
> 4db_name: bookreview_db
> 5sql_file: query_dataset/books_info.sql
> 6review_database:
> 7db_type: sqlite
> 8db_path: query_dataset/review_query.db

Second, a natural-language description tells the agent what each database contains and its schema:                       

> Database Description (Excerpt)
> You are working with two databases to solve this query. Here are the descriptions of these two databases:
> 1. books_database
> System: PostgreSQL. Contains Amazon book information including descriptions, price, details, title, etc., up to 2023.
> Tables:
> •books_info (Book information): title ,subtitle ,author ,
> rating_number ,features ,description ,price ,store ,
> categories ,details ,book_id
> 2. review_database
> System: SQLite. Contains Amazon book review information including ratings, review text, helpfulness votes, etc., up to 2023.
> Tables:
> •review (Review information): rating ,title ,text ,purchase_id ,
> review_time ,helpful_vote ,verified_purchase
> (Descriptions for the table fields are omitted for brevity.)

Third, the hints file describes the transformations applied during dataset creation, alerting the agent to data quality issues it may encounter:                 

> Hints (Excerpt)
> •book_id (in books_info ) and purchase_id (in review ) refer to the same book entities and can be matched via fuzzy join despite differences in formats.
> •Some queries may require information from details or
> categories in books_info .

## 3 EXPERIMENTS 

We evaluate five frontier LLM agents on DAB , running 50 trials per query per agent. Overall performance is low: the best agent achieves only 38% pass@1 accuracy and no more than 69% pass@50, and one dataset ( patents ) is never solved correctly by any agent across all trials. All agent trajectories are publicly available. 1 We describe the evaluation setup in Section 3.1, present results in Sec-tion 3.2, conduct a failure analysis in Section 3.3, and compare against PromptQL [ 36 ], a production data agent built by the Hasura PromptQL co-authors, to gauge the impact of specialized infras-tructure on agent performance (Section 3.4). Each result section highlights actionable Takeaways throughout. 

## 3.1 Experimental Setup 

Each agent uses a frontier model (Section 3.1.1), is equipped with tools for database querying and Python execution (Section 3.1.2), and operates in a ReAct-style loop (Section 3.1.3). The prompts include tool usage instructions, the query, and dataset-level descrip-tions and hints (Section 3.1.4). We run 50 trials per query per agent, yielding a total of 13,500 trials and costing approximately $3,150. 

3.1.1 LLMs. We test five frontier models that support tool calling through their APIs, including closed-sourced models GPT-5.2 and GPT-5-mini (via Microsoft Azure Foundry) and Gemini-3-Pro and Gemini-2.5-Flash (via the Google Gemini API), as well as the open-sourced model Kimi-K2 (via the Together.AI API). Configurable parameters (e.g., temperature and reasoning effort) are set to the provider’s default. We select these models to cover widely-used providers and to include both higher-capability and lower-cost models. We select Kimi-K2 because it ranked first among open-sourced models as reported on the Terminal-Bench 2.0 leaderboard as of December 20, 2025 2. Our selection is also constrained by API credit availability; notably, we were unable to obtain credits for Anthropic’s Claude models. 

3.1.2 Tools. Modern LLMs support tool calling : given a set of func-tion signatures and descriptions in the prompt, the agent can invoke a function by generating its name and arguments as structured out-put, which the runtime then executes and returns the result to the agent. We provide agents with four tools: list_db , query_db ,

> execute_python

, and return_answer , which enable them to enumer-ate tables, run read-only queries against a specified database (in a SQL dialect or MongoDB’s query language, depending on the 

> 1https://drive.google.com/file/d/1SjCkvwsc4m1S17l_rzu9PHAAei3jAL4i/view?usp= drive_link
> 2https://www.tbench.ai/leaderboard/terminal-bench/2.0
> 6

database), execute arbitrary Python, and return the final answer to terminate execution, respectively (see Table 2). Each tool execution returns two fields: a Boolean indicating success or failure, and the execution result (if successful) or an error message (if failed). All five model APIs support issuing multiple tool calls within a single iteration, enabling the agent to, e.g., query several databases in parallel. 

3.1.3 Agent Loop. Agents operate in a ReAct-style loop [ 48 ], alter-nating between reasoning and action: at each iteration , the agent receives the current context (the full message history, including prior tool calls and their results) and generates a response that may include one or more tool calls. The runtime executes each call and appends the result to the context for the next iteration. Each trial (i.e., query attempt) is limited to 100 iterations and a maximum wall-clock time of one hour. Individual tool calls time out after 600 seconds, and API calls that return non-200 response codes are re-tried up to three times before being recorded as failures. Below, we describe how iterations are handled and how context is managed. 

Iteration handling. Each iteration consists of a single LLM call, which may return one or more tool calls; each is executed and both the call and its result are appended to the context. Any plain-text response the model produces alongside tool calls is ignored. Two edge cases arise when the model returns zero tool calls: if the tool-call field is None , we treat this as the agent declining to attempt the query and terminate execution immediately with an error we define as no_tool_call ; if the tool-call field is an empty list, we treat this as the agent electing to skip the current iteration and continue execution. 

Context management. With up to 100 iterations per trial, the context accumulates every prior tool call and its result. A sin-gle query_db call—e.g., SELECT * FROM a large table—can return megabytes of output; after several such calls, the context can ex-ceed the model’s input token limit. To prevent this, we truncate large tool results to 10,000 characters before appending them to the context and write the complete result to the local file system. The context retains a variable name pointing to the stored file, enabling the agent to load the full result via execute_python in a subsequent iteration. Large error messages are truncated in the context but not persisted to storage. We intentionally keep our context manage-ment mechanism minimal: more sophisticated context management could mask poor context usage by the model. 

3.1.4 Prompts. The agent receives a system prompt (shared across all queries) and a user prompt (query-specific). Figure 3 summarizes the key components; full templates are in Section B. The system prompt is identical across models except for a minor syntactic adap-tation: the variable names under which tool results are stored differ in format across providers, and not all formats are valid Python identifiers, requiring a small change in how the agent accesses prior results in execute_python .3

3.1.5 Evaluation Metrics. LLM outputs are stochastic, so we run 50 trials per query per agent and measure accuracy using pass@ 𝑘 [ 7], a metric widely adopted in agent evaluation. pass@1 estimates                    

> 3GPT’s API assigns tool-call IDs like call_1 , which are valid Python variable names. Other providers assign IDs containing characters such as hyphens (e.g.,
> function-call-1 ), requiring access via locals() instead. See Section B for details.
> Prompt Structure (Stylized)
> System Prompt
> Role: Data analysis agent; use only the provided tools.
> Tool definitions: Name, required arguments, and return format for each of: list_db ,query_db ,execute_python ,return_answer .
> Storage protocol: Each tool result is stored under a key derived from the tool-call ID. Large results ( >10k characters) are written to JSON files; the agent receives a preview and a file path for later retrieval.
> Output constraints:
> •Tool calls only—no free-text reasoning.
> •Python results must be JSON-serializable, printed with the
> __RESULT__: prefix.
> •Final answer returned exclusively via return_answer .
> Examples: One example call per tool.
> User Prompt
> QUERY: ⟨natural-language query ⟩
> DATABASE DESCRIPTION: ⟨logical names, system types, schemas ⟩
> HINTS: ⟨dataset-level transformation hints ⟩

Figure 3: Stylized summary of the prompt structure. The sys-tem prompt is shared across all queries; the user prompt is instantiated per query. Database descriptions and hints are dataset-level and remain unchanged across queries within the same dataset (see Section 2.2). Full templates are in Sec-tion B. 

the probability of success on a single attempt; pass@ 𝑘 for larger 𝑘 

estimates the probability that at least one of 𝑘 independent attempts succeeds. Formally, given 𝑛 trials of which 𝑐 are correct: pass@ 𝑘 = 1 −

 𝑛 −𝑐 𝑘 

 𝑛 𝑘 

 .

In our experiments, 𝑛 = 50 for all queries and agents. We report pass@1 as the primary metric and use the full pass@ 𝑘 curve to distinguish queries that are solvable but unreliable (low pass@1, high pass@ 𝑘 ) from queries that no agent solves even with many attempts (low pass@ 𝑘 for all 𝑘 ). All reported averages are stratified :we compute the metric per query, average across queries within each dataset, then average across the 12 datasets, so that datasets with more queries do not receive disproportionate weight. Beyond accuracy, we report the cost (in USD) and trajectory statistics for each agent. A trajectory is the full sequence of LLM calls, tool calls, and results produced during a trial; we measure its latency, number of iterations, and number of tool calls. 

## 3.2 Results 

We report accuracy (Section 3.2.1), cost (Section 3.2.2), and trajec-tory statistics (Section 3.2.3). 

3.2.1 Accuracy. Figure 4 plots pass@1 for each agent. Gemini-3-Pro leads at 38% pass@1, followed by GPT-5-mini (30%), GPT-5.2 (25%), Kimi-K2 (23%), and Gemini-2.5-Flash (9%). GPT-5-mini out-performs GPT-5.2 despite being the smaller and cheaper model, 

> 7

Table 2: Description of tools given to baseline ReAct agents. 

Tool Argument(s) Description Example   

> list_db db_name

Returns the names of all tables in the database specified by db_name , or an error if it does not exist.  

> list_db( 'books ')

returns the names of the tables in the books data-base: [books_info, authors_info] . 

> query_db db_name

, query Verifies that query , written in SQL or Mongo, is read-only and, if valid, executes it on the database specified by db_name , returning the query result or an error if execution fails.      

> query_db( 'books ','SELECT title, details FROM books_info; ')

executes the specified query on the books database and returns the tuples from the books_info table with the specified columns, stored in the variable var_call_123 .  

> execute_python code

Executes triple-quoted Python code via exec(code, env) in a Docker environment with Python 3.12 and two popular data-processing libraries, Pandas and Pyarrow, preinstalled, with a 600s timeout. Here,  

> env

is a dictionary that maps variable names to prior tool call results. The execution result must be JSON-serializable and printed with the prefix line  

> __RESULT__:

to be correctly parsed.    

> execute_python("""import pandas as pd df = pd.DataFrame(var_call_123) res =df[df[ 'details '].str.contains( 'English ',regex=False)].copy() print( '__RESULT__: ')print(json.dumps(res.to_dict(orient= 'records '))""")

returns the books written in English extracting language information from the free-text details column.   

> return_answer answer

Returns answer and terminates agent execution. The agent terminates and returns the answer using        

> return_answer( 'The books written in English are Fire Cracker, . . . ')

.50 100 200 500 1000 2000 

Cost (USD, log scale) 

0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

> Pass@1

GPT-5.2 

GPT-5-mini 

Gemini-3-Pro 

Gemini-2.5-Flash 

Kimi-K2 1 5 10 15 20 30 40 50 

k

0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

> Pass@k
> GPT-5.2
> GPT-5-mini
> Gemini-3-Pro
> Gemini-2.5-Flash
> Kimi-K2

Figure 4: Cost (USD, log scale) vs. pass@1 accuracy. GPT-5-mini achieves the best cost-accuracy tradeoff; Gemini-3-Pro leads in accuracy at 20 × the cost. Figure 5: Pass@ 𝑘 as a function of 𝑘 (number of attempts). Agent rankings remain stable across all 𝑘 ; even at 𝑘 =50 , the best agent does not exceed 69%. 

suggesting that model scale alone does not determine agent perfor-mance. Table 3 reports the per-dataset breakdown. No agent solves any query in patents across all trials, and deps_dev_v1 is nearly as difficult, with the highest pass@1 at just 6%. Figure 5 shows how accuracy scales with repeated attempts. Agent rankings remain consistent across all values of 𝑘 : Gemini-3-Pro leads throughout, followed by GPT-5-mini, Kimi-K2, GPT-5.2, and Gemini-2.5-Flash. Even at 𝑘 =50 , the best agent reaches only 69% pass@50 , followed by GPT-5-mini at 59%, Kimi-K2 at 56%, GPT-5.2 at 51%, and Gemini-2.5-Flash at 40%. The large gap between pass@1 and pass@50 reflects high variance across trials, but even pass@50 remains low, indicating that additional attempts alone are insufficient to solve many queries. 

3.2.2 Cost and Efficiency. Figure 4 plots total API cost (in USD) against pass@1 for each agent, and Table 4 reports the per-dataset breakdown. GPT-5-mini is the cheapest at $67 total; the remaining agents are 2–20 × more expensive, with Gemini-3-Pro the costli-est at $1,355. GPT-5-mini offers the best cost-accuracy tradeoff: it achieves 30% pass@1 at a fraction of the cost of Gemini-3-Pro (38% pass@1, 20 × the cost) and Kimi-K2 (23% pass@1, 19 × the cost). Kimi-K2 is notable as the worst value—nearly as expensive as Gemini-3-Pro but 15 percentage points less accurate. The stock-market dataset consistently incurs the highest cost across agents, since its 2,754 tables force agents to issue many exploratory queries before identifying relevant data. 

3.2.3 Trajectory Statistics and Patterns. Table 6 reports latency, iterations, and tool calls per trajectory, broken down into data-base queries and Python executions. We highlight four takeaways around: computation strategy, diminishing returns from additional iterations, parallel tool calling, and data exploration overhead. 

Takeaway: Pushing aggregation into SQL yields better cost-efficiency. 

All agents issue more database queries than Python executions (Table 6), but the ratio varies sharply. GPT-5-mini averages a 2.6:1 

> 8

Table 3: Pass@1 score by dataset, with the average across all 12 datasets. One dataset remains completely unsolved by every agent. Green: highest per dataset; 0: zero Pass@1.                                                                   

> Dataset GPT-5.2 GPT-5-mini Gemini-3-Pro Gemini-2.5-Flash Kimi-K2
> agnews 00.05 0.20 00.13
> bookreview 0.52 0.49 0.89 0.01 0.43
> crmarenapro 0.53 0.64 0.63 0.20 0.54
> deps_dev_v1 00.06 0.02 00
> github_repos 0.22 0.23 0.36 0.04 0.19
> googlelocal 0.28 0.32 0.55 0.19 0.39
> music_brainz_20k 0.14 0.24 0.32 0.31 0.24
> pancancer_atlas 0.44 0.53 0.56 0.04 0.19
> patents 00000
> stockindex 0.35 0.33 0.38 0.05 0.29
> stockmarket 0.32 0.45 0.40 0.19 0.24
> yelp 0.23 0.22 0.19 0.04 0.15
> Average 0.25 0.30 0.38 0.09 0.23

Table 4: Cost (USD) by dataset, with total across all 2,700 trials per agent. stockmarket , the dataset with the most tables (2,754), consistently incurs the highest cost.                                                                   

> Dataset GPT-5.2 GPT-5-mini Gemini-3-Pro Gemini-2.5-Flash Kimi-K2
> agnews 9.76 3.50 219.02 9.02 83.86
> bookreview 13.56 4.33 32.37 3.21 64.70
> crmarenapro 35.10 9.73 195.72 12.71 106.85
> deps_dev_v1 13.96 3.18 48.46 3.53 100.76
> github_repos 16.10 5.01 74.56 7.88 107.02
> googlelocal 8.80 1.95 23.94 3.71 33.97
> music_brainz_20k 6.57 1.42 30.50 0.77 18.52
> pancancer_atlas 29.66 5.44 54.97 10.54 123.99
> patents 17.46 7.64 80.23 10.54 236.88
> stockindex 9.32 1.65 20.08 1.91 24.84
> stockmarket 89.68 14.65 500.79 44.11 266.35
> yelp 33.19 8.38 74.65 32.81 135.85
> Total (in USD) 283 67 1,355 140 1,304

DB-to-Python ratio, pushing aggregation into SQL (e.g., SELECT MAX(...) , GROUP BY ) and completing most queries in 3–5 tool calls. Kimi-K2 averages 1.1:1, fetching broad result sets and processing them in Python. In one egregious case ( stockmarket /query3), Kimi-K2 queries 25+ individual stocks one at a time rather than using a single UNION ALL . This largely explains the cost gap: GPT-5-mini costs $67 total at 30% pass@1, while Kimi-K2 costs $1,304 at 23%.  

> Takeaway: Additional iterations do not help on hard queries.

Kimi-K2 and Gemini-3-Pro are the most resource-intensive, aver-aging 23 and 12 iterations per trajectory respectively, with average latencies exceeding 3 and 2 minutes. On the hardest queries—almost exclusively from stockmarket , which requires navigating thousands of tables—trajectories reach 50+ tool calls and over 10 minutes of la-tency, yet pass@1 remains near zero. Scaling compute per trajectory is insufficient; iteration quality matters more than quantity.  

> Takeaway: Parallel tool calling is underutilized, but could improve latency and cost.

Table 5: Data exploration overhead per agent. We classify each tool call in a trajectory as either exploratory (e.g., list_db ,   

> SELECT *LIMIT 5

, information_schema queries) or analytical 

(all others), using a Claude Code subagent as the annotator. Statistics are computed across 54 trajectories (run 0 of each query in our benchmark).             

> Agent Exploratory calls % of tool calls
> Kimi-K2 3.81 24.3% Gemini-3-Pro 2.65 22.7% GPT-5-mini 1.39 19.9% GPT-5.2 1.33 17.2% Gemini-2.5-Flash 0.52 10.1%

A single iteration may produce multiple simultaneous tool calls, which explains why some agents in Table 6 show fewer iterations than tool calls. GPT-5.2 parallelizes most frequently, issuing multi-ple tool calls in 12.7% of turns (up to 25 concurrent calls), followed by Gemini-3-Pro at 6.1%. The remaining models parallelize in fewer than 1.5% of turns, but the capability exists: GPT-5-mini averages 1.27 calls per turn yet has a standard deviation of 3.72—nearly 3 ×

the mean—and a maximum of 234 concurrent calls in a single turn, indicating that it almost always acts sequentially but occasionally bursts into massive parallelism. Gemini-2.5-Flash similarly reaches 86 concurrent calls despite parallelizing in only 0.2% of turns. Multi-database workloads are a natural setting for parallelism, since each source can be queried independently.  

> Takeaway: Agents that explore too little or too much both underperform.

Before issuing analytical queries, agents spend a variable number of tool calls exploring data— list_db calls, sample queries ( SELECT * LIMIT 5 ), and catalog inspections. To quantify this overhead, we use a Claude Code subagent to classify each tool call in a trajec-tory as exploratory or analytical, and report the results in Table 5. The two highest-accuracy agents—Gemini-3-Pro (38% pass@1) and GPT-5-mini (30%)—both spend roughly 20% of their tool calls on ex-ploration. Gemini-2.5-Flash spends only 10%, skipping exploration and jumping to broad queries that return large results the model cannot process—it frequently returns None in the tool-call field, ter-minating the trajectory immediately (Section 3.1.3). Kimi-K2 spends 24% but explores data serially, issuing list_db and sample queries for every table one at a time, consuming nearly 4 tool calls per trajectory on discovery alone. 

## 3.3 Error Analysis 

We analyze failed trajectories to identify where improvements would have the most impact. Existing failure taxonomies such as MAST [ 6] target multi-agent interactions and do not capture data-specific failures (e.g., selecting the wrong column vs. writing an incorrect regular expression); Terminal-Bench [30] similarly finds MAST insufficient. We describe our methodology in Section 3.3.1, define five failure modes in Section 3.3.2, and quantify their preva-lence in Section 3.3.3. 

3.3.1 Methodology. Following standard qualitative analysis meth-ods, three paper authors independently examined 30 failed trajecto-ries from the bookreview dataset, sampling two per agent per query. 

> 9

Table 6: Trajectory statistics per agent. Each metric is first av-eraged across 50 trials for a given query, then across queries.                                                     

> Agent Latency (s) #Iterations #Tool calls #DB queries #Python execs
> Stratified average across all queries
> GPT-5.2 46.4 6.1 7.3 4.3 2.0 GPT-5-mini 69.0 7.2 8.9 5.7 2.2 Gemini-3-Pro 140.8 11.7 12.5 7.0 4.6 Gemini-2.5-Flash 69.3 8.5 7.9 4.1 3.5 Kimi-K2 199.1 22.8 21.1 10.7 9.5
> Hardest query (highest per-query average)
> GPT-5.2 96.6 16.9 17.6 7.5 9.2 GPT-5-mini 192.3 15.6 62.3 54.6 6.7 Gemini-3-Pro 630.3 42.0 43.3 15.4 27.2 Gemini-2.5-Flash 202.3 25.6 25.0 6.8 17.9 Kimi-K2 637.5 56.2 50.7 21.6 28.2

For each trajectory, one author traced the agent’s reasoning step by step, identified the primary cause of failure, and documented it in natural language. The other two reviewed these annotations and ab-stracted recurring patterns into high-level failure modes, finalized through discussion until consensus. This process revealed three recurring causes of incorrect answers: flawed solution plans, wrong data selection, and incorrect implementation. For completeness, we also define two failure modes for trajectories that can be classified automatically: those in which the agent declines to engage with the query, and those that terminate due to runtime errors. Together, these form the five failure modes ( FM1 through FM5 ) defined in Section 3.3.2. The manual inspection covers only 30 trajectories. To classify failures at scale, we first identify all trajectories that fail to pro-duce the correct answer. Trajectories that terminate before calling  

> return_answer

are classified as FM1 or FM5 directly from the er-ror type. For the remaining trajectories, which complete but return an incorrect answer, we use GPT-5 as an LLM judge, following prior work [ 6, 30 ]. We sample up to five such trajectories per query per agent and prompt GPT-5 with three inputs: the complete trajectory, the query and its ground-truth answer, and the definitions and examples of each FM . GPT-5 selects the failure mode that best explains why the agent’s answer is incorrect. The full annotation prompt is in Section C.1. After discarding responses where GPT-5 fails to produce a valid classification, this process yields 1,147 annotated trajectories across the five agents. 4

3.3.2 Failure Mode Definitions. We define five FMs below and provide brief examples for each. The full trajectories corresponding to these examples are shown in Section C.2.  

> FM1

Fails before planning. The agent makes no attempt to solve the query. We distinguish two variants. FM1 (no_tool_call) : the agent returns None in the tool-call field, triggering a no_tool_call er-ror that terminates execution immediately. FM1 (other) : the agent refuses to attempt the query—for example, calling return_answer 

with “I cannot solve this because I cannot join across databases” as its first action, without using the available tools. We did not observe FM1 (other) among the five agents evaluated here but 

> 4Per agent: 241 (GPT-5.2), 232 (GPT-5-mini), 203 (Gemini-3-Pro), 217 (Gemini-2.5-Flash), 254 (Kimi-K2).

include it for completeness, as we have observed it anecdotally in less powerful models (not included in our evaluation).  

> FM2

: Incorrect plan. An agent attempts a solution, but the plan 

(i.e., the logical structure of the solution) is incorrect—even if exe-cuted perfectly (i.e., without any implementation error), the plan cannot produce the correct answer. For example, when asked to identify the decade with the highest average rating across all book reviews, the agent might first compute the average rating per book and then averages these book-level averages within each decade, instead of directly averaging all review ratings within each decade. Other instances of this failure mode include missing required oper-ations or adding irrelevant ones: the agent may miss a requirement that the selected books must have an average rating of exactly 5, or it may incorrectly restrict the computation to only the first 100 tu-ples (e.g., by adding LIMIT 100 ) when the query requires considering all tuples in the table.  

> FM3

: Incorrect data selection. An agent follows a theoretically correct plan but selects incorrect data sources (e.g., tables, columns) during execution. For example, when asked to retrieve all books written in English, the agent checks the description column for language information, whereas this information is actually recorded in the details column.  

> FM4

: Incorrect implementation. An agent follows a theoreti-cally correct plan and selects the correct data sources, but imple-ments the plan incorrectly. For example, when extracting the pub-lication year from the details column—natural-language strings recording metadata such as publication years, languages, and IS-BNs (i.e., numeric identifiers assigned to books for cataloging and commercial purposes)—the agent applies a regular expression, such as \b(19\d{2}|20\d{2})\b , and returns the match with the smallest value, which may correspond to an ISBN segment rather than the true year.  

> FM5

: Runtime error. The agent encounters an error during run-time, including API failures (i.e., non-200 HTTP response codes). For example, we observe BadRequestError messages such as “In-valid 'messages[i].tool_calls ': array too long. Expected an array with maximum length 128” in GPT-5-mini and “Input validation error” 

in Kimi-K2 (with error code 400). We also observe several “Service unavailable” messages in Kimi-K2 calls (with error code 503). Other runtime errors include request timeouts (exceeding the 600s limit), reaching the API call limit (100 calls), exceeding the model’s input token limit, or hitting the overall execution time limit (1 hour). 

3.3.3 Results. Figure 6 shows failure mode frequencies across tra-jectories. FM1 (no_tool_call) and FM5 are classified automati-cally; FM1 (other) , FM2 , FM3 , and FM4 require LLM-judge annotation and are reported as a single combined category (red bar). Figure 7 decomposes this category into its four constituent failure modes. We report three takeaways below.  

> Takeaway: Agents typically select the right data, but fail at planning the computation or implementing it correctly.

Among the 1,147 trajectories that completed but returned incorrect answers (Figure 7), FM4 (incorrect implementation) is the most common at 45%, followed by FM2 (incorrect plan) at 40%, FM3 

(incorrect data selection) at 15%, and FM1 (other) at 0%. The low rate of FM3 indicates that agents generally identify the correct tables and columns; the dominant challenge is deciding what to           

> 10 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

Percentage (%) 

GPT-5.2 

GPT-5-mini 

Gemini-3-Pro 

Gemini-2.5-Flash 

Kimi-K2 

Frequencies of All Failure Modes 

> FM1 (no_tool_call)
> FM1 (other), FM2, FM3, FM4
> FM5
> Successful trials

Figure 6: Breakdown of all trajectories. Most failures fall into the red category ( FM1 (other) , FM2 , FM3 , FM4 ), which requires LLM-judge annotation. Runtime errors ( FM5 ) are rare; FM1 (no_tool_call) is significant only for Gemini-2.5-Flash (63.4%). 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 

Percentage (%) 

GPT-5.2 

GPT-5-mini 

Gemini-3-Pro 

Gemini-2.5-Flash 

Kimi-K2 

Frequencies of FM1 (other), FM2, FM3, and FM4 

among sampled trajectories    

> FM1 (other) FM2 FM3 FM4

Figure 7: Decomposition of the red bar in Figure 6 (trajec-tories that completed but returned incorrect answers), an-notated by GPT-5 over 1,147 trajectories. FM4 and FM2 

account for 85% of failures; FM3 is rare; FM1 (other) does not occur. 

compute and computing it correctly. Together, FM2 and FM4 

account for 85% of incorrect answers.   

> Takeaway: Gemini-2.5-Flash fails primarily by returning null responses.
> FM5

accounts for a negligible fraction of failures for all agents except Kimi-K2, where 6.6% of trials fail due to runtime errors (pre-dominantly API failures). FM1 (no_tool_call) disproportionately affects Gemini-2.5-Flash at 63.4%, compared to 2.4% for Gemini-3-Pro and 0% for all other agents. Manual inspection of these  

> FM1 (no_tool_call)

trajectories shows that most occur immedi-ately after the model receives a large tool result that has been truncated and stored to a file. Rather than reading the full result from the stored file, the weak LLM produces a null response—likely overwhelmed by the volume of returned data.  

> Takeaway: All agents use regex for text extraction and fail when regex is insufficient.

A recurring pattern within FM4 is that every agent uses reg-ular expressions for extracting structured values from free-text fields, and none attempts NLP-based parsing (e.g., dateutil.parser ), named-entity recognition, or LLM-based extraction. This explains the 0% pass@1 on patents , whose queries require parsing varied natural-language date formats (e.g., “dated 5th March 2019”, “March 

Table 7: Pass@1 for PromptQL and the baseline ReAct agent. Both agents use the Claude-Opus-4.6 model and n=5 trials per query. Green denotes the higher score; 0 denotes zero pass@1. Dataset PromptQL ReAct 

agnews 0.65 0.30 

bookreview 1.00 1.00 

crmarenapro 0.80 0.79 

deps_dev_v1 0 0.40 

github_repos 0.25 0.35 

googlelocal 0.60 0.75 

music_brainz_20k 0.13 0.07 

pancancer_atlas 0.60 0.47 

patents 0 0

stockindex 0.67 0.33 

stockmarket 0.60 0.40 

yelp 0.80 0.40 

Average 0.51 0.44 the 18th, 2019”) as a first step in a multi-stage pipeline. Every agent attempts regex-based date extraction, fails, and never recovers. The same pattern produces systematic errors elsewhere: on pan-cancer_atlas , a regex for MALE matches inside the string FEMALE ,causing gender misclassification; on bookreview , year-extraction patterns inadvertently match ISBN segments. Exposing dedicated extraction tools—such as date parsers, NER taggers, or LLM-based extraction operators—alongside SQL and Python execution would address the hardest unsolved queries in DAB .

## 3.4 Case Study: PromptQL 

To gauge the impact of specialized infrastructure on agent per-formance, co-authors from Hasura independently evaluated DAB 

using PromptQL [ 36 ], their production data agent platform. Promp-tQL constructs a semantic layer before query execution—profiling the underlying databases to build curated metadata including table relationships, column descriptions, and data characteristics—and uses a proprietary prompting and orchestration framework on top of some underlying LLM; further architectural details are not public. The PromptQL agent can use any LLM as its backbone. To control for model capability, the Hasura team ran both the PromptQL agent and our baseline ReAct agent with Claude-Opus-4.6, using 5 trials per query for both configurations. Table 7 reports pass@1 per dataset for both agent configura-tions. The PromptQL agent achieves a stratified average pass@1 of 51% , compared to 44% for the ReAct baseline—a 7-percentage-point (pp) improvement—scoring higher on 7 of 12 datasets while the ReAct baseline scores higher on 3. The agents are tied on 2 datasets. Datasets where the bottleneck is locating relevant tables and columns see the largest improvements: e.g., yelp (+40 pp), ag-news (+35 pp), stockindex (+34 pp), and stockmarket (+20 pp, with 2,754 tables). Both agents fail on all queries in patents , which re-quire bulk extraction from unstructured text columns. In short, the PromptQL agent helps when the hard part is finding the right data, but does not yet address all challenges in DAB .

> 11

## 4 RELATED WORK 

Despite databases being among the most ubiquitous professional tools, no frontier-model evaluation includes a database-use bench-mark. We position DAB against five areas of related work on getting LLM agents to query and reason over data. Table 8 summarizes coverage of DAB ’s four properties—multi-database integration (i), ill-formatted join keys (ii), unstructured text transformation (iii), and domain knowledge (iv), as defined in Section 2.1. 

Text-to-SQL. Text-to-SQL benchmarks evaluate the ability of an LLM to produce a single correct query given a natural-language question. Classic benchmarks such as Spider [ 25 ], WikiSQL [ 51 ], and BIRD [ 26 ] use publicly available databases with relatively clean tables and schemas. Later work extends to multi-turn dialogue set-tings [ 49 ], and Spider 2.0 [ 25 ] broadens coverage to cloud database query dialects such as those of BigQuery and Snowflake. How-ever, even these “enterprise-scale” benchmarks do not reflect the messiness of real enterprise data, as demonstrated by BEAVER [ 8 ]: on private data warehouses, current LLMs achieve poor accuracy. More fundamentally, all the aforementioned benchmarks evaluate query generation , not the end-to-end data agent workflow. Some par-tially require domain knowledge (iv)—BIRD, for instance, provides “evidence” hints that encode business logic—but none requires cross-database integration (i), reconciliation of ill-formatted join keys (ii), or transformation of unstructured text (iii). Recent work also raises concerns about benchmark reliability: annotation error rates reach 52.8% in BIRD Mini-Dev and 62.8% in Spider 2.0-Snow [ 20 ], and a systematic audit of ten agentic benchmarks finds that seven can misestimate performance by up to 100% in relative terms [ 54 ]. DAB 

is smaller than these benchmarks by design—each query requires end-to-end execution across real database systems—and prioritizes annotation quality over quantity. 

Table question-answering. Table QA benchmarks present tables directly in the prompt and ask the model to reason over cell val-ues [ 9 , 10 , 33 , 43 , 53 ]. Some involve unstructured text (iii), such as HybridQA [ 9 ], or domain knowledge (iv), such as FinQA [ 10 ]. However, the agent never queries a database (i), and real-world tables almost always exceed context-window limits. 

Data science and data engineering. Data science benchmarks such as DS-1000 [ 23 ], DA-Code [ 16 ], and KramaBench [ 22 ] ask agents to write multi-step code to analyze datasets and produce an answer. However, these benchmarks operate on flat files and do not require the agent to query databases, let alone work across different query dialects. Spider 2-V [ 5 ] tests multimodal agents on data engineering tools in a desktop environment, but its tasks center on operating tools through GUI actions (e.g., configuring an Airbyte sync or building a dbt materialized view), not on writing queries directly against databases and reasoning over the results. 

Semantic query processing. Semantic query processing extends relational operators (select, project, join, etc.) with natural-language variants powered by LLMs [ 21 , 28 , 29 , 34 , 40 ]. Benchmarks such as SemBench [ 24 ] and TAG-Bench [ 2] evaluate these operators by executing a pre-constructed pipeline over flat files to obtain a single correct answer. Because data are provided as flat files, they do not capture multi-system integration (i), and any domain knowledge (iv) is encoded in the pipeline specification. The semantic operations in DAB (iii) are a subset of those these benchmarks evaluate, but 

Table 8: Coverage of DAB ’s four properties across related work: (i) multi-database integration, (ii) ill-formatted join keys, (iii) unstructured text transformation, (iv) domain knowledge. ✔= yes, ◦= partially (i.e., some benchmarks in the category cover the property), ✗= no. (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) 

Text-to-SQL ✗ ✗ ✗ ◦

Table QA ✗ ✗ ✔ ◦

Data science & engineering ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

Semantic query processing ✗ ✗ ✔ ✗

General tool-use ✗ ✗ ✗ ◦

DAB ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔

DAB embeds them within an end-to-end querying workflow over real database systems. 

Tool-use benchmarks. Tool-use benchmarks evaluate LLM agents on external tools such as function calling [ 35 ], code editing [ 19 ], browser interaction [ 52 ], and command-line tasks [ 30 ]. GAIA [ 31 ]combines multi-step reasoning with web browsing but requires no database interaction (i). A second group targets data-adjacent work-flows such as retail customer service [ 47 ] and CRM operations [ 15 ], but exposes each database operation through hand-crafted API endpoints—the agent never queries the database directly. 

## 5 CONCLUSION 

We presented DAB , the first benchmark for evaluating data agents on realistic, multi-database queries. Grounded in a formative study of enterprise workloads, DAB comprises 54 queries across 12 datasets, 9 domains, and 4 database systems, requiring capabilities consis-tently absent from existing benchmarks: multi-database integration, ill-formatted join keys, unstructured text transformation, and do-main knowledge. Even the best frontier model achieves only 38% pass@1, and our error analysis shows that the dominant challenges are in formulating correct plans and implementing them correctly. 

DAB represents a significant step forward for data agent evaluation, and we hope it helps the community build data agents that can be trusted in production. 

## REFERENCES                                   

> [1] Mohamed Bekheet. 2023. Amazon Books Reviews. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mohamedbakhet/amazon-books-reviews. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [2] Asim Biswal, Liana Patel, Siddarth Jha, Amog Kamsetty, Shu Liu, Joseph E Gonzalez, Carlos Guestrin, and Matei Zaharia. 2024. Text2sql is not enough: Unifying ai and databases with tag. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14717 (2024). [3] Timo Bozsolik. 2019. Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) Data. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/bigquery/cpc. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [4] Timo Bozsolik. 2019. deps.dev BigQuery dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/github/github-repos/. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [5] Ruisheng Cao, Fangyu Lei, Haoyuan Wu, Jixuan Chen, Yeqiao Fu, Hongcheng Gao, Xinzhuang Xiong, Hanchong Zhang, Wenjing Hu, Yuchen Mao, et al .2024. Spider2-v: How far are multimodal agents from automating data science and engineering workflows? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 107703–107744. [6] Mert Cemri, Melissa Z Pan, Shuyi Yang, Lakshya A Agrawal, Bhavya Chopra, Rishabh Tiwari, Kurt Keutzer, Aditya Parameswaran, Dan Klein, Kannan Ram-chandran, et al .2025. Why do multi-agent llm systems fail? arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13657 (2025).
> 12

[7] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shan-tanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. (2021). arXiv:2107.03374 [cs.LG] [8] Peter Baile Chen, Fabian Wenz, Yi Zhang, Devin Yang, Justin Choi, Nesime Tatbul, Mike Cafarella, Çağatay Demiralp, and Michael Stonebraker. 2025. BEAVER: An Enterprise Benchmark for Text-to-SQL. In The 4th Table Representation Learning Workshop at ACL 2025 . https://openreview.net/forum?id=OgP25r2pBZ [9] Wenhu Chen, Hanwen Zha, Zhiyu Chen, Wenhan Xiong, Hong Wang, and William Yang Wang. 2020. HybridQA: A dataset of multi-hop question answering over tabular and textual data. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 . 1026–1036. [10] Zhiyu Chen, Wenhu Chen, Charese Smiley, Sameena Shah, Iana Borova, Dylan Langdon, Reema Moussa, Matt Beane, Ting-Hao Huang, Bryan R Routledge, et al .2021. Finqa: A dataset of numerical reasoning over financial data. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .3697–3711. [11] Victoria Clarke and Virginia Braun. 2017. Thematic analysis. The journal of positive psychology 12, 3 (2017), 297–298. [12] Databricks, Inc. 2025. Introducing Databricks Assistant Data Science Agent. https://www.databricks.com/blog/introducing-databricks-assistant-data-science-agent. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [13] Elliot Glazer, Ege Erdil, Tamay Besiroglu, Diego Chicharro, Evan Chen, Alex Gunning, Caroline Falkman Olsson, Jean-Stanislas Denain, Anson Ho, Emily de Oliveira Santos, et al . 2024. Frontiermath: A benchmark for evaluating ad-vanced mathematical reasoning in ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04872 (2024). [14] Google. 2021. deps.dev BigQuery dataset. https://docs.deps.dev/bigquery/v1/. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [15] Kung-Hsiang Huang, Akshara Prabhakar, Sidharth Dhawan, Yixin Mao, Huan Wang, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Philippe Laban, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2025. Crmarena: Understanding the capacity of llm agents to perform profes-sional crm tasks in realistic environments. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) . 3830–3850. [16] Yiming Huang, Jianwen Luo, Yan Yu, Yitong Zhang, Fangyu Lei, Yifan Wei, Shizhu He, Lifu Huang, Xiao Liu, Jun Zhao, et al . 2024. DA-Code: Agent Data Science Code Generation Benchmark for Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .13487–13521. [17] IBM. 2024. What are Data Silos? https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/data-silos. Accessed: 2026-02-03. [18] Yelp Inc. 2022. Yelp Dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/yelp-dataset/yelp-dataset. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [19] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2024. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-world Github Issues?. In The Twelvth International Conference on Learning Representations .[20] Tengjun Jin, Yoojin Choi, Yuxuan Zhu, and Daniel Kang. 2026. Pervasive Anno-tation Errors Break Text-to-SQL Benchmarks and Leaderboards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.08778 (2026). [21] Saehan Jo and Immanuel Trummer. 2024. Thalamusdb: Approximate query processing on multi-modal data. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 

2, 3 (2024), 1–26. [22] Eugenie Lai, Gerardo Vitagliano, Ziyu Zhang, Om Chabra, Sivaprasad Sudhir, Anna Zeng, Anton A Zabreyko, Chenning Li, Ferdi Kossmann, Jialin Ding, et al .2026. KRAMABENCH: A Benchmark for AI Systems on Data-to-Insight Pipelines over Data Lakes. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations . https://openreview.net/forum?id=fZfUdeCC5X [23] Yuhang Lai, Chengxi Li, Yiming Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Ruiqi Zhong, Luke Zettle-moyer, Wen-tau Yih, Daniel Fried, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. 2023. DS-1000: A natural and reliable benchmark for data science code generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 18319–18345. [24] Jiale Lao, Andreas Zimmerer, Olga Ovcharenko, Tianji Cong, Matthew Russo, Gerardo Vitagliano, Michael Cochez, Fatma Özcan, Gautam Gupta, Thibaud Hottelier, et al . 2025. SemBench: A Benchmark for Semantic Query Processing Engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01716 (2025). [25] Fangyu Lei, Jixuan Chen, Yuxiao Ye, Ruisheng Cao, Dongchan Shin, Hongjin SU, ZHAOQING SUO, Hongcheng Gao, Wenjing Hu, Pengcheng Yin, et al . 2025. Spider 2.0: Evaluating Language Models on Real-World Enterprise Text-to-SQL Workflows. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .[26] Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, et al . 2023. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 42330–42357. [27] Jiacheng Li, Jingbo Shang, and Julian McAuley. 2022. Uctopic: Unsupervised con-trastive learning for phrase representations and topic mining. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) . 6159–6169. [28] Paweł Liskowski, Benjamin Han, Paritosh Aggarwal, Bowei Chen, Boxin Jiang, Nitish Jindal, Zihan Li, Aaron Lin, Kyle Schmaus, Jay Tayade, et al . 2025. Cor-tex AISQL: A Production SQL Engine for Unstructured Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.07663 (2025). [29] Chunwei Liu, Matthew Russo, Michael Cafarella, Lei Cao, Peter Baile Chen, Zui Chen, Michael Franklin, Tim Kraska, Samuel Madden, Rana Shahout, et al . 2025. Palimpzest: Optimizing ai-powered analytics with declarative query processing. In Proceedings of the Conference on Innovative Database Research (CIDR) . 2. [30] Mike A Merrill, Alexander G Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E Kelly Buchanan, et al . 2026. Terminal-Bench: Benchmarking Agents on Hard, Realistic Tasks in Command Line Interfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11868 (2026). [31] Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .[32] Oleh Onyshchak. 2020. Stock Market Dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/jacksoncrow/stock-market-dataset. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [33] Panupong Pasupat and Percy Liang. 2015. Compositional Semantic Parsing on Semi-Structured Tables. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) . 1470–1480. [34] Liana Patel, Siddharth Jha, Melissa Pan, Harshit Gupta, Parth Asawa, Carlos Guestrin, and Matei Zaharia. 2025. Semantic operators and their optimization: En-abling llm-based data processing with accuracy guarantees in lotus. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 18, 11 (2025), 4171–4184. [35] Shishir G Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Fanjia Yan, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E Gonzalez. 2025. The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL): From Tool Use to Agentic Evaluation of Large Language Models. In 

Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .[36] PromptQL / Hasura, Inc. 2026. PromptQL: The AI Analyst for Reliable Natural Language Interaction with Data. https://promptql.io/. AI platform for business-contextual data access and analysis via natural language; accessed Feb 2026. [37] Reza Rafiee. 2021. PanCan Atlas Dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rezarafiee/pancan-atlas-dataset-9126-samples-440-features. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [38] Erhard Rahm. 2010–2019. Benchmark datasets for entity resolution. https://dbs.uni-leipzig.de/research/projects/benchmark-datasets-for-entity-resolution. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [39] Alieh Saeedi, Eric Peukert, and Erhard Rahm. 2017. Comparative evaluation of distributed clustering schemes for multi-source entity resolution. In European Conference on Advances in Databases and Information Systems . Springer, 278–293. [40] Shreya Shankar, Tristan Chambers, Tarak Shah, Aditya G Parameswaran, and Eugene Wu. 2025. DocETL: Agentic Query Rewriting and Evaluation for Complex Document Processing. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 18, 9 (2025), 3035– 3048. [41] Snowflake, Inc. 2025. Cortex Agents. https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/ snowflake-cortex/cortex-agents. Accessed: 2026-02-28. [42] Stitch. 2024. The Causes and Costs of Data Silos. https://www.stitchdata.com/ resources/data-silos/. Accessed: 2026-02-03. [43] Alon Talmor, Ori Yoran, Amnon Catav, Dan Lahav, Yizhong Wang, Akari Asai, Gabriel Ilharco, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Multi-Modal{QA}: complex question answering over text, tables and images. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum? id=ee6W5UgQLa [44] Uber Engineering. 2024. QueryGPT – Natural Language to SQL Using Generative AI. https://www.uber.com/blog/query-gpt/. Uber Engineering blog post; accessed Feb 2026. [45] Brandon Xu et al . 2026. Inside OpenAI’s In-House Data Agent. https://openai. com/index/inside-our-in-house-data-agent/. [46] An Yan, Zhankui He, Jiacheng Li, Tianyang Zhang, and Julian McAuley. 2023. Personalized showcases: Generating multi-modal explanations for recommenda-tions. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . 2251–2255. [47] Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2025. 𝜏 -Bench: A Benchmark for Tool-Agent-User Interaction in Real-World Domains. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .

> 13

[48] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations .[49] Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Heyang Er, Suyi Li, Eric Xue, Bo Pang, Xi Victoria Lin, Yi Chern Tan, Tianze Shi, Zihan Li, et al . 2019. Cosql: A conversational text-to-sql challenge towards cross-domain natural language interfaces to databases. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing and the 9th international joint conference on natural language processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) . 1962–1979. [50] Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015. Character-level convolutional networks for text classification. Advances in neural information processing systems 

28 (2015). [51] Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2017. Seq2sql: Generating structured queries from natural language using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00103 (2017). [52] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al . 2024. WebArena: A Realistic Web Environment for Building Autonomous Agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .[53] Fengbin Zhu, Wenqiang Lei, Youcheng Huang, Chao Wang, Shuo Zhang, Jiancheng Lv, Fuli Feng, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2021. TAT-QA: A Question An-swering Benchmark on a Hybrid of Tabular and Textual Content in Finance. In 

Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) . 3277–3287. [54] Yuxuan Zhu, Tengjun Jin, Yada Pruksachatkun, Andy Zhang, Shu Liu, Sasha Cui, Sayash Kapoor, Shayne Longpre, Kevin Meng, Rebecca Weiss, et al . 2025. Establishing best practices for building rigorous agentic benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02825 (2025). 

> 14

## A DATASETS AND QUERIES IN DAB 

Table 9 provides the all queries in DAB . The raw data are available at https://github.com/ucbepic/DataAgentBench. 

> 15

Table 9: All queries in DAB 

Dataset Query 

agnews 

What is the title of the sports article whose description has the greatest number of characters? What fraction of all articles authored by Amy Jones belong to the Science/Technology category? What is the average number of business articles published per year in Europe from 2010 to 2020, inclusive? In 2015, which region published the largest number of articles in the World category? 

bookreview 

Which decade of publication (e.g., 1980s) has the highest average rating among decades with at least 10 distinct books that have been rated? Return the decade with the highest average rating. Which English-language books in the ‘Literature & Fiction’ category have a perfect average rating of 5.0? Return all matching books. Which books categorized as ‘Children’s Books’ have received an average rating of at least 4.5 based on reviews from 2020 onwards? 

crmarenapro 

Can this lead be qualified based on the latest discussions? If the answer is no, which factors—‘Budget’, ‘Authority’, ‘Need’, or ‘Timeline’—are responsible? Return only one or several of the four BANT factors that the lead qualification fails to meet (i.e. ‘Budget’, ‘Authority’, ‘Need’, ‘Timeline’). ## Lead qualification guide. Look for the voice call transcripts with the lead and relevant knowledge articles to justify the lead qualification. - Lead Id to be considered is: 00QWt0000089AekMAE Does the cost and setup of this quote comply with our company policy? If it doesn’t, which knowledge article is it in conflict with? Return only the Id of the knowledge article that the quote violates. If no violation is found, return None. ## Quote approval guide. Look for relevant knowledge articles to justify the quote approval. - Quote Id to be considered is: 0Q0Wt000001WSDVKA4 Is the stage name accurately representing the tasks for this opportunity? If it is not, what should the appropriate stage name be? Return only the correct stage label among (‘Qualification’, ‘Discovery’, ‘Quote’, ‘Negotiation’, ‘Closed/). - Opportunity Id to be considered is: 006Wt000007BGGjIAO Is there a particular month in the past 10 months where the number of SecureAnalytics Pro cases significantly exceeds those of other months? The associated product Id is 01tWt000006hVJdIAM. Return only the month name. - Today’s date: 2021-04-10 What has been the most frequent problem AI Cirku-Tech encountered over the past five months? The associated product Id is 01tWt000006hV8LIAU. Return only the issue Id of the most reported issue for this product. - Today’s date: 2023-01-16 Is the product setup in this quotation, including elements like quantity and price, against company regulations? Return only the Id of the knowledge article that the invalid config violates. ## Invalid config guide. Look for the relevant knowledge articles to justify the invalid config. - Quote Id to be considered is: 0Q0Wt000001WRAzKAO 

> 16

Table 9 (continued) Dataset Query 

Did the agent breach the policy, and if so, which knowledge article was breached? Return only the Id of the knowledge article or None if no violation is found. - Case Id to be considered is: 500Wt00000DDyznIAD Identify the agent with the fewest transfer counts in the last 4 quarters among those who handled more than 0 cases. Return only the Id of the agent. ## Transfer Count Policy - Definition: The number of instances a case was reassigned or transferred from one agent to another. Each transfer from agent A to agent B adds to the transfer count for agent A. - In the queries that specify ‘agents managed/queries x cases’—this filter applies to both the first agent that the case was first assigned to and the agent that the case was transferred to. This means that if an agent has 2 cases that was initially assigned to itself by admin and 1 case transferred from another agent, a filter like ‘handled/managed at least 3 cases” would not filter this agent out. - For cases that have NOT been transferred to an other agent, there will be only ONE ‘Owner Assignment’, and for those that have been transferred, there will be MORE THAN ONE ‘Owner Assignment’. ## Today’s date: 2023-04-10 Which states have the quickest case closure time in the past 6 quarters? Return only the two-letter abbreviation of the most matching state (eg. CA). - Today’s date: 2022-10-26 In the past four months, which agent had the lowest average handle time for those processing more than one case? Return only the Id of the agent. ## Handle Time Policy - Definition: The duration taken to close a case. Specifically, it is the time from when a case is opened to when it is closed. - In the queries that specify ‘agents managed/queries x cases’—this filter applies to both the first agent that the case was first assigned to and the agent that the case was transferred to. This means that if an agent has 2 cases that was initially assigned to itself by admin and 1 case transferred from another agent, a filter like ‘handled/managed at least 3 cases’ would not filter this agent out. - When computing handle time, we do not compute handle time for cases that have been transferred to other agents. - For cases that have NOT been transferred to an other agent, there will be only ONE ‘Owner Assignment’, and for those that have been transferred, there will be MORE THAN ONE ‘Owner Assignment’. ## Today’s date: 2023-09-02 Can you show me the AI processing unit I purchased last month? Return only the Id of the product from the contact’s relevant past transaction. - Contact Id interacting: 003Wt00000Jqy8SIAR - Today’s date: 2021-07-15 Who had the quickest average turnaround from opening to closing opportunities among agents in April 2023? Return only the Id of the agent. ## Sales Cycle Policy - Definition: The sales cycle is measured as the number of days between an opportunity’s creation date and the company signed date on the corresponding contract. ## Today’s date: 2024-09-12 

> 17

Table 9 (continued) Dataset Query 

Identify the agent who achieved the top sales figures for orders made in the past five months. Return only the Id of the agent. ## Sales Amount Policy - Definition: The sales amount for an order is calculated as the product of the quantity and the unit price from the Order object (Quantity * UnitPrice). An opportunity is eligible if its associated contract has a company signed date that falls within the time interval of interest. - Today’s date: 2022-11-25 

deps_dev_v1 Considering only the latest release versions for each distinct NPM package, which packages are the top 5 most popular based on the Github star number, as well as their versions? Among all NPM packages with project license ‘MIT’ and marked as release, which 5 projects have the highest GitHub fork count? 

github_repos 

Among repositories that do not use Python, what proportion of their README.md files include copyright informa-tion? Identify the repository in Swift language that contains the most frequently copied non-binary Swift file in the dataset, ensuring that each file is uniquely determined by its ID. How many commit messages are found in repositories that use the Shell programming language and are licensed under Apache-2.0, where each message exists, is shorter than 1,000 characters, and does not begin with ‘merge’, ‘update’, or ‘test’? List the repository names for the top five GitHub repositories whose main language is not Python, ordered by the highest number of commits. 

googlelocal 

What are the top 5 businesses located in Los Angeles, California, ranked by highest average rating in descending order? Which massage therapy businesses have an average rating of at least 4.0, and what are their respective average ratings? What are the top 5 businesses that remain open after 6:00 PM on at least one weekday, ranked by highest average rating? Include their names, operating hours, and average ratings. Which 3 businesses received the highest number of reviews with ratings of 4.5 or higher during 2019? Include their names and the count of high-rating reviews. 

music_brainz_20k 

How much revenue in USD did Apple Music make from Beyoncé’s song ‘Get Me Bodied’ in Canada? Which store earned the most revenue in USD from Brucqe Maginnis’ song ‘Street Hype’ across all countries? Which song generated the highest total revenue in USD across all stores and countries? 

pancancer_atlas 

For LGG patients, compute the average log10-transformed expression of the IGF2 gene across different histology types. Only include patients with valid IGF2 expression values and histology annotations that are not enclosed in square brackets. Report the final average values with at least four decimal places of precision. Among BRCA patients in the PanCancer Atlas who are alive, which top three histological types show the highest percentage of CDH1 gene mutations? Calculate the chi-square statistic to assess the association between histological types and the presence of CDH1 gene mutations in female BRCA patients from the PanCancer Atlas, excluding categories with marginal totals less than or equal to 10, and only focusing on patients with known histological types and consider only reliable mutation entries. 

patents 

Identify the CPC technology areas with the highest exponential moving average of patent filings each year (smoothing factor 0.2), and return only the CPC group codes at level 5 whose best year is 2022. Find the CPC technology areas in Germany with the highest exponential moving average of patent filings each year (smoothing factor 0.1) for patents granted in the second half of 2019. Include the full title, CPC group code, and the best year for each CPC group at level 4. 

> 18

Table 9 (continued) Dataset Query 

Which assignees, excluding UNIV CALIFORNIA itself, have cited patents assigned to UNIV CALIFORNIA, and what are the titles of the primary CPC subclasses associated with these citations? Please provide the name of each citing assignee together with the full title of the CPC subclass. 

stockindex 

Which stock index in the Asia region has exhibited the highest average intraday volatility since 2020? Among North American stock indices, which indices had more up days than down days in 2018? If an investor had made regular monthly investments in all indices since 2000, which 5 indices would have produced the highest overall returns, and what countries do they belong to? 

stockmarket 

What was the maximum adjusted closing price in 2020 for The RealReal, Inc.? List all ETF securities listed on NYSE Arca that reached an adjusted closing price above $200 at any point during 2015, and also report the total number of such ETFs. List all company names on the NASDAQ-listed Market that were financially troubled (delinquent, deficient, or both) and have trading volume in 2008, for each, report its exisiting non-null average daily trading volume in 2008. What are the names (not symbol) of the top 5 non-ETF stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) that had more up days than down days in 2017? (Up days: closing price > opening price; Down days: closing price < opening price) Which 5 companies listed on the NASDAQ Capital Market had the highest number of days in 2019 where the intraday price range exceeded 20% of the low price, list the company names please? 

yelp 

What is the average rating of all businesses located in Indianapolis, Indiana? Which U.S. state has the highest number of reviews, and what is the average rating of businesses in that state? During 2018, how many businesses that received reviews offered either business parking or bike parking? Which business category has the largest number of businesses that accept credit card payments, and what is its average rating? Which U.S. state has the highest number of businesses that offer WiFi, and what is the average rating for those businesses? Which business received the highest average rating between January 1, 2016 and June 30, 2016, and what category does it belong to? Consider only businesses with at least 5 reviews. Among users who registered on Yelp in 2016, which 5 business categories have received the most total reviews from those users since 2016? 

> 19

## B PROMPTS 

Below is the system prompt for GPT models. For Gemini models and Kimi-K2, var_call_1 in Line 15 is replaced with locals()[ 'tool call id '] to accommodate tool-call IDs that are not valid Python identifiers 5 (e.g., function-call-1 by Gemini models, and 

functions.list_db:1 by Kimi-K2).  

> 1

You are a data analysis agent. Use only the tools listed below to answer the user 's query, based on the provided DATABASE DESCRIPTION for logical database names and their types (SQL or MongoDB), and the results of previous tool calls.  

> 23

TOOLS (system will execute):  

> 4

- query_db: run a SQL or Mongo query. Returns a list of JSON-serializable records or an error string.  

> 5

Required args: {"db_name": "<logical_db_name>", "query": "<SQL or Mongo query>"}  

> 6

- list_db: list tables or collections for a given database.  

> 7

Required args: {"db_name": "<logical_db_name>"}  

> 8

- execute_python: run Python code.  

> 9

Required args: {"code": "<python_code>"}  

> 10

- return_answer: finish and return the final answer (plain text).  

> 11

Required args: {"answer": "<final plain-text answer>"}  

> 12 13

INSTRUCTIONS:  

> 14

1. After each tool call, its result will be stored in a storage under a key named after the tool call id (you will be told the key name). The next message will include both the result (or a preview if it 's large) and the storage key name.  

> 15

2. Inside execute_python code you may read storage entries directly as variables using the provided key names. You should directly use the key names as variable names in your code, e.g., if the tool call id is "call_1", you can access its result via the variable `var_call_1 ` in your code, without quotes or other modifications.  

> 16

3. You cannot modify or reassign those storage-provided variables ; you may read them and create new variables as needed.  

> 17

4. If a tool result is large, the next message will include a preview (first 10000 characters) and the storage entry will be the .json file path (a string) where the full result is stored. To access the full result, your execute_python code must open and read that .json file.  

> 18 19

KEY RULES (must follow exactly):  

> 20

1. Always use tool calls. Do not output plain text, explanations, or reasoning.  

> 21

2. Include all required arguments for the tool you call.  

> 22

3. For query_db, always specify db_name and query. Refer the DATABASE DESCRIPTION for db_name and query format.  

> 23

4. For PostgreSQL, wrap mixed-case or uppercase column names in double quotes.  

> 24

5. For list_db, refer the DATABASE DESCRIPTION to specify db_name . 

> 25

6. Use execute_python for data processing as needed.  

> 26

7. When using execute_python, your code will be quoted by triple double-quotes and passed as a string to `exec(...) ` for execution in a Python 3.12 environment with only pandas and pyarrow installed. So you must ensure your code is compatible with this execution method. For exampe, do not use triple double-quotes in your code, as they may interfere with parsing. Do not use non-built-in or non-installed packages.  

> 27

8. When using execute_python, your code must print the result at the end exactly as shown in the PRINT FORMAT section below. The printed result must be a string that can be successfully parsed by json.loads() without errors.  

> 28 29

PRINT FORMAT (must match exactly):  

> 30

----BEGIN PRINT FORMAT---- 

> 31

print("__RESULT__:")  

> 32

print(your_json_serializable_string_here) 

> 5

The system prompts for all models are available at: https://drive.google.com/drive/ folders/14SiSz7CVnQA58YOAzFzNjoUu3Wnmfe5t?usp=drive_link  

> 33

----END PRINT FORMAT---- 

> 34 35

For simple types (int, float, str, bool, None), you may use json. dumps() to produce a valid JSON string.  

> 36

For complex or non-JSON-serializable types, you must convert them into JSON-compatible forms before printing.  

> 37

For lists or dictionaries, you must ensure that all nested elements are also converted into JSON-serializable types.  

> 38

9. Return the final answer only via a single return_answer tool call. Do not include extra text, explanation, or formatting.  

> 39 40

EXAMPLES:  

> 41

- query_db:  

> 42

{"tool": "query_db", "args": {"db_name": "some_db_name", "query": "SELECT * FROM some_table LIMIT some_limit;"}} # for SQL databases  

> 43

{"tool": "query_db", "args": {"db_name": "some_db_name", "query": "{"collection": "some_collection", "filter": {some_filter }, "projection": {some_projection}, "limit": some_limit}"}} # for MongoDB databases  

> 44 45

- list_db:  

> 46

{"tool": "list_db", "args": {"db_name": "some_db_name"}}  

> 47 48

- execute_python:  

> 49

{"tool": "execute_python", "args": {"code": "import pandas as pd  

> 50

# rl1 and rl2 are the keys of two JSON-serializable record lists in storage  

> 51

df1 = pd.DataFrame(rl1)  

> 52

df2 = pd.DataFrame(rl2)  

> 53

result = pd.merge(df1, df2, on= 'id ').head(10).to_json(orient= '

records ') 

> 54

print( '__RESULT__: ') 

> 55

print(result)"}}  

> 56 57

- return_answer:  

> 58

{"tool": "return_answer", "args": {"answer": "...final plain-text answer..."}}  

> 59 60

If you cannot proceed, call return_answer with a short explanatory message.  

> 61 62

Do not output explanations, reasoning, or any natural language outside of the required tool calls. 

## C FAILURE DESCRIPTION AND EXAMPLES C.1 FM Annotation Prompt 

Below is the prompt template for GPT-5 to annotate FM1 (other) ,

FM2 , FM3 , and FM4 for a failed trajectory.  

> 1

You are given a trace of a FAILED task executed by a data agent, along with the task query and the ground-truth answer. Your task is to diagnose WHY the agent 's final answer does not match the ground truth using the failure modes FM1-4 defined below.  

> 23

The agent had access to the following tools:  

> 4

- list_db: list tables in a database  

> 5

- query_db: execute SQL queries  

> 6

- execute_python: run Python code for data processing  

> 7

- return_answer: terminate and return the final answer  

> 89

The trace records the complete interaction between the data agent and the available tools. That is, the trace contains:  

> 10

- Exploratory tool calls (trial-and-error)  

> 11

- Tool calls that directly contributed to the final answer  

> 12 13

## IMPORTANT INSTRUCTIONS:  

> 14

1. First, identify ONLY the tool calls whose outputs were used ( directly or indirectly) to produce the final answer. Ignore abandoned, failed, or exploratory tool calls that did not affect the final output.  

> 20 15

2. Base your failure analysis ONLY on those contributing tool calls.  

> 16

3. You must mark at least one failure mode as "yes". By default, select exactly one failure mode-the most specific one that best explains why the final answer is incorrect. Select multiple failure modes only if the failure cannot be adequately explained by any single mode alone (i.e., each selected mode captures a distinct, necessary cause visible in the contributing tool calls).  

> 17

4. Only mark a failure mode as "yes" if you can point to a concrete example in the trace.  

> 18

5. Provide a single-sentence summary explaining the failure, explicitly referencing the trace behavior.  

> 19 20

## FAILURE MODELS  

> 21

FM1 - Fails Before Planning  

> 22

Definition:  

> 23

- The agent does not attempt to solve the query.  

> 24

Example:  

> 25

- The agent does not issue any tool calls.  

> 26 27

FM2 - Incorrect Plan  

> 28

Definition:  

> 29

- The agent attempts to solve the user 's query, but the PLAN (i.e ., the logical structure) of the solution is wrong. That is , even if all steps were executed perfectly (e.g., correct data selection, correct implementation, no execution errors ), the plan cannot produce the ground-truth answer.  

> 30

Examples:  

> 31

- Missing operations specified or implied by the user.  

> 32

- Adding constraints not requested by the user.  

> 33

- Stops early and returns an answer before all requirements of the query are completed.  

> 34 35

FM3 - Correct Plan, Wrong Data Selection  

> 36

Definition:  

> 37

- The agent follows a theoretically correct plan for answering the user 's query, but selects incorrect data sources in its implementation, such that the required information exists but is retrieved from the wrong database, table, collection , column, or field.  

> 38

Example:  

> 39

- Using an incorrect column in a selection or filtering condition (e.g., a WHERE clause references a column that does not represent the queried attribute, even though the correct column exists elsewhere in the schema).  

> 40

- Querying or joining a table that does not represent the queried entity, despite the correct table exists elsewhere in the schema.  

> 41 42

FM4 - Correct Plan and Data Selection, Incorrect Implementation  

> 43

Definition:  

> 44

The agent the correct plan and selects the correct tables and columns, but implements the computation incorrectly.  

> 45

Examples:  

> 46

- Arithmetic errors, such as computing an aggregate with an incorrect formula (e.g., dividing by the number of unique entities rather than the total number of contributing entities or records when calculating an overall average).  

> 47

- Incorrect regular expressions or parsing rules, such that extracted values include unintended matches or miss required values (e.g., patterns that capture unrelated numbers or fail to match the intended tokens).  

> 48

- Parsing errors, such as using unsupported syntax, improper escaping, or assumptions about the execution environment that cause incorrect behavior or failed execution.  

> 49

- Incorrect join implementation, where the agent applies an invalid join condition or fails to normalize or transform identifiers before joining, even though the trace indicates awareness that normalization or alignment is required.  

> 50 51

## QUERY  

> 52

{{uesr_query}}  

> 53 54

## GROUND-TRUTH ANSWER  

> 55

{{ground_truth_answer}}  

> 56 57

## FAILED TRACE  

> 58

{{failed_trajectory}}  

> 59 60

## OUTPUT FORMAT  

> 61

Your output MUST follow this exact format, starting after @@ and ending before @@:  

> 62 63

@@  

> 64

A. Freeform text summary of the failure:  

> 65

<one sentence>  

> 66

B. Failure modes encountered:  

> 67

FM1: <yes or no>  

> 68

FM2: <yes or no>  

> 69

FM3: <yes or no>  

> 70

FM4: <yes or no>  

> 71

@@ 

## C.2 Examples of Failed Trajectories 

Examples in this section are drawn from the bookreview dataset, with the following description and hints:  

> 1

DATABASE DESCRIPTION:  

> 2

You are working with two databases to solve this query.  

> 34

Here are the descriptions of these two databases:  

> 56

1. books_database  

> 7

- This database is stored in a PostgreSQL database and contains Amazon book information including descriptions, price, details, title, etc. up to 2023.  

> 8

- This database consists of one table:  

> 9

- books_info:  

> 10

- Fields:  

> 11

- title (str): Book title  

> 12

- subtitle (str): Book subtitle  

> 13

- author (str): Book author(s)  

> 14

- rating_number (int): Total number of ratings received  

> 15

- features (str): Book features (stored as string representation of list/dict)  

> 16

- description (str): Book description (stored as string representation of list/dict)  

> 17

- price (float): Book price  

> 18

- store (str): Store information  

> 19

- categories (str): Book categories (stored as string representation of list/dict)  

> 20

- details (str): Additional book details  

> 21

- book_id (str): Unique book identifier  

> 22 23

2. review_database  

> 24

- This database is stored in a SQLite database and contains Amazon book review information including ratings, text, helpfulness votes, etc. up to 2023.  

> 25

- This database consists of one table:  

> 26

- review  

> 27

- Fields:  

> 28

- rating (float): Rating given by reviewer (1.0-5.0 scale ) 

> 29

- title (str): Review Title  

> 30

- text (str): Review text content  

> 31

- purchase_id (str): Unique identifier linking to book_id in books_info table in books_database  

> 32

- review_time (str): Timestamp when review was posted  

> 33

- helpful_vote (int): Number of helpful votes received  

> 34

- verified_purchase (bool): Whether purchase was verified  

> 1

HINTS:  

> 2

- In books_info, the "description", "categories", and "features" content appears to be in list or dictionary format, but they are actually stored as strings in the .sql file.  

> 3

- The fields "book_id" in books_info and "purchase_id" in review refer to the same book entities across different tables. While the field names are not exact matches, they can be joined using a fuzzy join approach to solve the query.  

> 21 4- For some queries, you could get needed information from " categories" or "details" columns in books_info.

There are three queries under bookreview, denoted as Q1, Q2, and Q3. We list the queries and their corresponding ground-truth an-swers A1, A3, and A3 below: 

(Q1) Which decade of publication (e.g., 1980s) has the highest average rating among decades with at least 10 distinct books that have been rated? Return the decade with the highest average rating. 

(A1) 2020 

(Q2) Which English-language books in the ’Literature & Fiction’ cate-gory have a perfect average rating of 5.0? Return all matching books. 

(A2) The Sludge; Something That Feels Like Truth (Switchgrass Books); Kennebago Moments; Hollywood Confessions: Hol-lywood Headlines Book #3 (Hollywood Headlines Mysteries); Forged in Blood (Freehold); Local Honey; "Exits, Desires, & Slow Fires"; Fire Cracker; Reunion: The Children of Lauderdale Park; Childe Harold of Dysna; The Prophet: With Original 1923 Illustrations by the Author; Knowing When To Die: Uncol-lected Stories; Liza of Lambeth; Child Of The King A Journey of Hope Book 1: Earthly Story With A Heavenly Message; The Melancholy Strumpet Master; 

(Q3) Which books categorized as ’Children’s Books’ have received an average rating of at least 4.5 based on reviews from 2020 onwards? 

(A3) Around the World Mazes; Behind the Wheel (Choose Your Own Adventure #35)(Paperback/Revised); Benny Goes To The Moon: The great new book from Top Children’s entertainer Gerry Ogilvie (1); "Cheer Up, Ben Franklin! (Young Historians)"; Favorite Thorton W. Burgess Stories: 6 Books; Egypt (Enchant-ment of the World); "Pokemon: Sun & Moon, Vol. 8 (8)"; The Library Book; LunaLu the Llamacorn; Monstrous Stories #4: The Day the Mice Stood Still; The Old Man and the Pirate Princess; Trouble in the CTC!: The Terra Prime Adventures Book 2; "Clark the Shark: Tooth Trouble, No. 1"; Cleo Porter and the Body Electric; For brevity, we analyze only the failure modes of selected exam-ple trajectories and omit the full interaction traces 6.

C.2.1 FM2 : Incorrect Plan for Averaging. 

Model. GPT-5-mini 

Query. Q1 

Analysis. This trajectory fails due to an incorrect averaging plan: it computes decade-level averages by averaging per-book average ratings, whereas the query requires directly averaging all ratings within each decade. Specifically, the final answer in Line 423 de-rives from the execute_python tool call in Line 368, which uses results from prior query_db calls that retrieve records from books 

(Line 48; var_call_mC9eh9kdqR7TFrzmoKhf7oa0 ) and reviews (Line 36; var_call_clwW1HpxqxlCKDXJvn9Iim9W ). The agent first computes per-book average ratings—treating each purchase_id as a book identifier—when processing review records (Line 38). After merg-ing the retrieved books and reviews tables in Python (Line 396),      

> 6Complete trajectories are available at https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/ 1FES67CWgfOaR-1FRcqoIeyvNaUV4NFZ6?usp=drive_link. In these example trajec-tories, for presentation clarity, we omit system and user prompts, and truncate large tool results to 300 characters.

it computes decade-level averages by averaging these per-book averages (Line 401), resulting in an incorrect aggregation. 

C.2.2 FM2 : Missing Operations. 

Model. Gemini-2.5-flash 

Query. Q2 

Analysis. This trajectory fails by missing a required constraint: the selected books must have an average rating of exactly 5.0. Specifi-cally, the final answer in Line 591 is produced by the execute_python 

tool call in Line 561, which depends on a prior execute_python call in Line 525, itself derived from a query_db call in Line 113. All three calls contributing to the final answer ignore the constraint that the average rating must equal 5.0. 

C.2.3 FM2 : Adding Operations. 

Model. GPT-5-mini 

Query. Q3 

Analysis. This trajectory fails by introducing unwarranted opera-tions: it adds LIMIT 200 when retrieving review records (Line 38) and LIMIT 500 when retrieving book records (Line 50), while the query does not require any such limits. 

C.2.4 FM3 : Incorrect Column Selection. 

Model. GPT-5-mini 

Query. Q2 

Analysis. This trajectory fails by selecting an incorrect column. To filter books written in English, the agent relies on columns other than the correct one (i.e., details ) in the books_info table, although the database description already indicates details as the correct col-umn (Line 39). Specifically, in Line 125 of the trajectory below, the agent attempts to search for “English” using details , description ,and other columns. However, the book records it inspects origi-nate from var_call_he4GeOzFNhdoBfpZPxkmX09E (Line 110), which is produced by the query_db call in Line 51 executing SELECT book_id, title, author, categories, description FROM books_info; This query does not retrieve the details column. In effect, the agent searches for “English” using columns other than the correct one (details ), leading to failure. 

C.2.5 FM4 : Incorrect Regular Expression. 

Model. GPT-5.2 

Query. Q1 

Analysis. This trajectory fails due to an overly permissive regu-lar expression. The agent uses a pattern to extract any four-digit string starting with 19 or 20 (Line 66) and then selects the smallest extracted value (Line 73) as the publication year. This approach may incorrectly extract 1932 from an ISBN rather than the true publication year, 2004 , as in the example shown in Line 17.