Title: Agentic Jackal: Live Execution and Semantic Value Grounding for Text-to-JQL

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.09470v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Apr 2026 01:16:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Agentic Jackal: Live Execution and Semantic Value Grounding for Text-to-JQL 

Vishnu Murali * Anmol Gulati Elias Lumer Kevin Frank Sindy Campagna Vamse Kumar Subbiah 

Commercial Technology and Innovation Office, PricewaterhouseCoopers, U.S. 

# Abstract 

Translating natural language into Jira Query Lan-guage (JQL) requires resolving ambiguous field references, instance-specific categorical values, and complex Boolean predicates. Single-pass LLMs cannot discover which categorical val-ues (e.g., component names or fix versions) ac-tually exist in a given Jira instance, nor can they verify generated queries against a live data source, limiting accuracy on paraphrased or am-biguous requests. No open, execution-based benchmark exists for mapping natural language to JQL. We introduce Jackal, the first large-scale, execution-based text-to-JQL benchmark compris-ing 100,000 validated NL–JQL pairs on a live Jira instance with over 200,000 issues. To es-tablish baselines on Jackal, we propose Agen-tic Jackal, a tool-augmented agent that equips LLMs with live query execution via the Jira MCP server and JiraAnchor, a semantic retrieval tool that resolves natural-language mentions of cate-gorical values through embedding-based similar-ity search. Among 9 frontier LLMs evaluated, single-pass models average only 43.4% execution accuracy on short natural-language queries, high-lighting that text-to-JQL remains an open chal-lenge. The agentic approach improves 7 of 9 mod-els, with a 9.0% relative gain on the most linguisti-cally challenging variant; in a controlled ablation isolating JiraAnchor, categorical-value accuracy rises from 48.7% to 71.7%, with component-field accuracy jumping from 16.9% to 66.2%. Our analysis identifies inherent semantic ambiguities, such as issue-type disambiguation and text-field selection, as the dominant failure modes rather than value-resolution errors, pointing to concrete directions for future work. We publicly release the benchmark, all agent transcripts, and evaluation code to support reproducibility. 

> *Correspondence to: vishnu.v.murali@pwc.com

# 1. Introduction 

Natural language interfaces that map user requests into domain-specific query languages have become increasingly effective with the rise of Large Language Models (LLMs), reducing the learning curve of formal syntax for non-expert users. Atlassian Jira, one of the most widely used issue tracking and project management platforms, exemplifies the demand for such interfaces. Its Jira Query Language (JQL) supports complex Boolean logic, custom fields, and temporal predicates, but presents significant barriers for its 300,000+ users (Atlassian, 2025b). JQL further compounds the challenge with project- and instance-specific custom fields, linked-issue traversals, and value vocabularies that vary across deployments, making execution-based evalua-tion against a live instance essential (Lei et al., 2025). Despite this progress, the Jackal benchmark (Frank et al., 2025), the first open, execution-based benchmark for text-to-JQL, reveals that single-turn LLMs achieve over 90% accuracy on literal translations but collapse below 30% on paraphrased or under-specified variants. These results ex-pose two structural gaps that single-turn prompting alone cannot close. First, without a feedback loop, models gen-erating JQL in a single pass cannot verify or refine their output against the live instance. Second, categorical fields such as components, fix versions, and labels can contain thousands of instance-specific values, and without a mech-anism to discover which values actually exist in the live instance, a user request for ”version 6.5” may match none of the actual values (e.g., 6.5.0 , 6.5 ), causing the generated filter to silently return empty results. Concurrent findings in text-to-SQL confirm the same two gaps: Spider 2.0 (Lei et al., 2025) shows that enterprise conditions require itera-tive execution and refinement, and DIVER (Nan et al., 2026) demonstrates that resolving categorical values without live database access causes significant accuracy drops. In this paper, we introduce Agentic Jackal, a novel tool-augmented multi-step JQL agent built on the Jira MCP server that directly addresses both gaps (Figure 1). The agent generates, executes, and iteratively refines JQL queries using live Jira feedback, where three distinct signals (a non-empty result set, a zero-result response, and an error 1 

> arXiv:2604.09470v1 [cs.CL] 10 Apr 2026 Figure 1. Naive single-turn approach (left) compared to Agentic Jackal (right). The naive approach generates JQL in a single pass without tool access. The agent iteratively refines queries using JiraSearch and JiraAnchor (both available in Experiments 1 and 2), looping until it produces a verified output. The JiraAnchor tool enables the agent to resolve ambiguous user queries by retrieving relevant unique values in a field using the live Jira instance.

message) enable targeted corrections rather than speculative rewrites. To resolve the field-value disambiguation prob-lem, we introduce JiraAnchor, a novel semantic retrieval tool that queries the live Jira instance using grep-based and embedding-based similarity search to ground natural language field-value mentions in actual instance values. To-gether, these two components separate the concerns of value grounding and query verification, each targeting one of the two failure modes from prior approaches. We evaluate 9 frontier LLMs on Jackal-1K, a 1,000-query stratified subset of the Jackal benchmark, across two ex-periments measuring execution accuracy. The full agentic approach improves 7 of 9 LLMs, with gains concentrated on the most linguistically challenging query variants (9.0% relative improvement on Short NL). A controlled ablation isolating JiraAnchor on field-value-sensitive queries shows accuracy improving from 48.7% to 71.7%, with component accuracy rising from 16.9% to 66.2% across all 9 models. A manual error analysis reveals that semantic interpretation ambiguities (issue type disambiguation, text field selection, and version confusion) account for 58% and 68% of failures on the two hardest query variants, indicating that dominant errors stem from inherent natural language ambiguity rather than value resolution failures. Our contributions are as follows: • Agentic Jackal : A tool-augmented multi-step agent built on the Jira MCP server that equips LLMs with live JQL execution, iterative query refinement, and seman-tic value grounding via JiraAnchor, establishing the first open agentic baseline for enterprise text-to-JQL. We evaluate 9 frontier LLMs across two experiments on Jackal-1K, releasing all agent transcripts, evaluation results, and framework code. • JiraAnchor : A novel semantic field-value retrieval tool that resolves natural language mentions of instance-specific categorical values against a live Jira instance, directly addressing the user query value dis-ambiguation failure mode in text-to-JQL. • Error taxonomy : We identify six dominant failure categories across models and query variants, revealing that semantic interpretation ambiguities (issue type dis-ambiguation, text field selection, version confusion) account for the majority of errors on the hardest vari-ants, rather than value resolution failures. 

# 2. Related Work 

2.1. Text-to-SQL and the Enterprise Gap 

Increasingly realistic benchmarks drive progress in natural language interfaces to databases. WikiSQL (Zhong et al., 2017) introduced large-scale, execution-based evaluation on single tables, while Spider (Yu et al., 2018) shifted the focus to cross-domain generalization across unseen schemas. BIRD (Li et al., 2024) scaled to larger, more complex databases with real-world content, reporting ex-ecution accuracy around 73% for leading systems. Most recently, Spider 2.0 (Lei et al., 2025) reframes text-to-SQL around enterprise workflows with large schemas, multiple 2SQL dialects, and multi-step interactions. Execution ac-curacy drops to roughly 21%, compared to over 90% on Spider’s single-turn academic setup. This gap, which the authors attribute to the need for iterative execution, error recovery, and tool-assisted exploration, parallels the pattern in Jackal’s text-to-JQL evaluation, where single-turn LLMs achieve over 90% on literal translations but below 30% on paraphrased variants. 

2.2. Agentic Query Generation and Self-Correction 

This enterprise gap motivates multi-step architectures that decompose query generation and iteratively refine outputs. DIN-SQL (Pourreza & Rafiei, 2023) decomposes text-to-SQL into sub-tasks including schema linking, query classifi-cation, generation, and self-correction, improving execution accuracy on Spider by roughly 10 percentage points over few-shot prompting. However, DIN-SQL’s self-correction is intrinsic: the model re-reads its own SQL without executing it. Ablations show this step contributes only 1–3 percent-age points, illustrating the limits of model-internal review without external feedback. Subsequent systems introduce execution-based feedback loops. MAC-SQL (Wang et al., 2024) employs a multi-agent framework whose Refiner executes candidate SQL, observes errors or empty result sets, and rewrites the query accordingly. CHESS (Talaei et al., 2024) further specializes for enterprise-scale databases, pairing an Information Re-triever that grounds generation in actual stored values with a Unit Tester that validates candidates against generated tests, achieving state-of-the-art accuracy on BIRD. Both systems confirm that using execution results rather than model intro-spection as the refinement signal yields substantially better accuracy. These findings align with the broader paradigm of tool-augmented LLM agents (Lumer et al., 2025a; 2026a; Yao et al., 2023; Huang, 2025; Lumer et al., 2025d; Patil et al., 2025; Gulati et al., 2026) and self-correction (Kamoi et al., 2024), which concludes that self-correction without external feedback does not reliably improve outputs, whereas self-correction with execution results or tool outputs consistently does. Our agent operates in this setting: the live Jira in-stance provides unambiguous feedback signals (non-empty results, zero results, or error messages), enabling targeted corrections rather than speculative rewrites. 

2.3. Value Resolution in Structured Query Generation 

Beyond iterative execution, a second structural challenge in text-to-structured-query systems is resolving natural lan-guage mentions to the exact values stored in the target system. Models trained on general corpora cannot pre-dict instance-specific values such as version names, compo-nent labels, or project-specific tags. The BIRD benchmark demonstrates that providing external knowledge hints, in-cluding sampled database values, significantly improves generation accuracy (Li et al., 2024), and even frontier LLMs frequently generate plausible but non-existent values when this evidence is withheld. DIVER (Nan et al., 2026) provides the most thorough treatment of this problem, showing that accuracy drops by over 10 percentage points on BIRD when models must resolve categorical values without expert-provided evidence. DIVER addresses this through a multi-agent framework for dynamic interactive value linking, where specialized assistants iteratively probe the database using semantic sim-ilarity search, exact match, and value enumeration to pro-duce verified evidence for the downstream SQL generator. Additional work shows non-vector strategies in advanced retrieval-augmented generation such as grep-, knowledge-graph-, and table-of-contents-based strategies provide alter-natives to vector-only retrieval systems (Lumer et al., 2025c; Huang, 2025; Lumer et al., 2025b; 2024; Heule et al., 2025; Lumer et al., 2025a; Nizar et al., 2025). JiraAnchor targets the same fundamental problem in the JQL domain, where categorical field values such as components and versions follow non-obvious, instance-specific naming conventions. Where DIVER employs multi-turn iterative exploration, JiraAnchor consolidates value resolution into a single-call retrieval step, prioritizing simplicity and low latency within the broader agent loop (see Section 4.3 for implementation details). Both approaches confirm the same core finding: without live, query-time access to instance-specific values, model accuracy on value-sensitive queries collapses. We evaluate JiraAnchor’s impact in Experiment 2 (Section 5.3). 

2.4. Text-to-JQL 

Despite the iterative-execution and value-resolution chal-lenges identified above, open research on text-to-JQL remains limited. Existing resources include two pub-lic community datasets, Text2JQL (Kulkarni, 2023a) and Text2JQL v2 (Kulkarni, 2023b), which are limited in scale and lack execution-based evaluation, and an enterprise study reporting 54% exact match on 218 prompts (Wang et al., 2025), with neither data nor scripts released. Proprietary systems such as Atlassian Intelligence (Atlassian, 2025a; Clovity, 2025) provide natural language search but do not publish training data or evaluation suites. Jackal (Frank et al., 2025) addresses these gaps as the first open, large-scale, execution-based benchmark for text-to-JQL; its eval-uation exposes two structural failure modes, the inability to verify output without a feedback loop and unresolved instance-specific values, that Agentic Jackal directly targets. 3Figure 2. Overview of the two evaluation datasets. Left: Jackal-1K, a 1,000-query stratified subset of the Jackal benchmark with four NL variants per query, used in Experiment 1. Right: The Field-Value Evaluation Set, a targeted set of 2-clause queries covering three categorical fields, used in Experiment 2. 

# 3. Datasets 

3.1. Jackal-1K 

We draw our primary evaluation data from Jackal (Frank et al., 2025), the first open, execution-based benchmark for text-to-JQL. The full benchmark pairs 100,000 natural lan-guage requests with validated JQL queries on a live Jira in-stance containing over 200,000 issues spanning 22 projects. We select a stratified 1,000-query subset, Jackal-1K, as our evaluation set. Agentic evaluation requires live API calls for every query, model, and experimental condition; at 9 models and two conditions per experiment, a larger subset such as Jackal-5K would be cost- and rate-limit-prohibitive. We verify that Jackal-1K preserves the clause-count, field-type, and variant distributions of Jackal-5K from the original benchmark, ensuring that results generalize. Queries are constructed programmatically by assembling multi-clause Boolean filters (2–5 clauses) from field-operator-value triples drawn from the live instance schema. Hand-crafted rules filter out implausible combinations, and every surviving query is executed against the live instance; any that return an empty result set are discarded. The re-maining queries are sampled with balancing constraints across categorical value groups, date ranges, and text fields to ensure broad schema coverage (see Frank et al. (2025) for the full construction pipeline). Each validated query is paired with four natural language formulations produced by an LLM under controlled style prompts: Semantically Exact , a word-for-word rendering of the JQL logic that provides an upper bound on model performance; Long NL , a multi-sentence explanation that embeds each clause in a broader context; Short NL , a terse phrase naming the user’s intent without referencing JQL fields or operators; and Semantically Similar , a paraphrase that avoids all JQL vocabulary, requiring the model to re-cover both the correct field and the correct value from con-text alone. Appendix A provides full examples at varying clause complexities, and Appendix B reproduces the prompt templates used to generate each variant. From this pool, Jackal-1K draws 250 queries per variant, balanced across clause counts, yielding 1,000 (NL, JQL) pairs. The mean clause count is 3.5 (range 1–6), and average request length ranges from 5.9 words (Short NL) to 36.4 words (Long NL), with Semantically Exact at 17.8 and Semantically Similar at 16.6. The queries span 15 distinct Jira fields covering project metadata, dates, free-text search, and categorical attributes. Jackal-1K is used in Experiment 1 (Figure 2, left). 

3.2. Field-Value Evaluation Set 

To isolate the impact of JiraAnchor on categorical field-value resolution, we construct a separate, targeted evaluation set that is entirely disjoint from Jackal-1K. Whereas Jackal-1K queries contain 2–5 clauses spanning many fields, this set uses minimal 2-clause queries that pair a project filter with exactly one categorical field, ensuring that execution accuracy depends almost entirely on whether the model resolves the field value correctly. Each query follows the pattern project IN ("<project>") AND <field> IN 

4("<value>") and is expressed in the Semantically Similar variant, where the natural language avoids reusing field names or stored values. We chose Semantically Similar because it requires the most value inference and is where JiraAnchor provides the clearest signal. The set covers three categorical fields: • Fix Version (72 queries): e.g., “Tasks from the QT-BUG initiative planned for the 6.6.0 Beta3 release” →

fixVersion IN ("6.6.0 Beta3") 

• Affected Version (72 queries): e.g., “Problems en-countered in the first beta of version 6.4.0” →

affectedVersion IN ("6.4.0 Beta1") 

• Components (73 queries): e.g., “Tasks related to data structures and their operations” →

component IN ("Core: Containers and Algorithms") 

The component example illustrates the challenge: the nat-ural language description “data structures and their oper-ations” must be resolved to the exact stored name “Core: Containers and Algorithms,” a mapping that cannot be in-ferred without querying the live instance. This evaluation set is used in Experiment 2 (Figure 2, right). 

# 4. Agentic Jackal Architecture 

Agentic Jackal is a tool-augmented multi-step agent that generates, executes, and iteratively refines JQL queries us-ing live Jira feedback. Given a natural language request, the agent produces a candidate JQL query, executes it against the live Jira instance, observes the result, and de-cides whether to refine the query or return a final answer. The system comprises three components: the agent loop (Section 4.1), which orchestrates iterative query refinement; Jira Search (Section 4.2), which provides live execution feedback; and JiraAnchor (Section 4.3), a semantic retrieval tool that resolves natural language value mentions to their canonical stored forms (Figure 1). 

4.1. Agent Loop 

The agent is implemented as a two-node directed graph. The first node contains the LLM with a schema-grounded system prompt and bound tool definitions. The second node exe-cutes any tool calls issued by the LLM and returns results. Routing is conditional: if the LLM’s response contains one or more tool calls, control passes to the tool execution node and then returns to the LLM; if no tool calls are present, the graph terminates and the agent’s final message is returned. This pattern allows the agent to chain multiple tool calls across successive iterations before producing a final answer. The loop terminates when the LLM issues a response con-taining no tool calls, which serves as an implicit “accept” signal: the model has judged the most recent execution result sufficient and returns the final JQL. A framework-level recursion limit of 25 graph steps (approximately 12 tool-calling iterations) acts as a hard ceiling; if the agent exhausts this budget without converging, the run is recorded as a failure and no query is returned. The agent is equipped with 17 tools: 16 from the Atlassian Jira MCP server (Atlassian, 2025c) and one custom tool (JiraAnchor, Subsection 4.3). For text-to-JQL, the agent primarily uses Jira Search and JiraAnchor; the remaining MCP operations are bound but unused during evaluation. The agent is model-agnostic: all evaluated LLMs share the same architecture, system prompt, and tool definitions, isolating model capability from system design. 

4.2. Jira Search 

The primary execution tool accepts a JQL query string and runs it against the live Jira instance via the MCP server. The response includes matching issue keys, the total result count, and, for invalid queries, the Jira error message describing the syntax or schema violation. This feedback is returned directly to the LLM, giving the agent three distinct signals: a non-empty result set confirms the query is plausible, a zero-result response suggests an overly restrictive or misaligned filter, and an error message pinpoints the exact clause that failed. The agent uses these signals to decide whether to return the current query, relax constraints, or correct a field name or value before re-executing. 

4.3. JiraAnchor 

While Jira Search validates query correctness through execu-tion feedback, it cannot resolve natural language mentions of instance-specific categorical values. JiraAnchor is a cus-tom semantic field-value retrieval tool that we implement outside the Atlassian MCP server to address this value dis-ambiguation problem. It connects to the same Jira instance as the MCP tools but is not part of the MCP server’s tool suite; it is a standalone component purpose-built for text-to-JQL (Figure 3). JiraAnchor accepts three inputs: a JQL field name (e.g., 

fixVersion , component , labels ), a natural lan-guage query describing the value the user intends, and an optional list of project keys to scope the search. It operates in two stages (Figure 3). First, it fetches all unique values for the specified field from the live Jira instance via the REST API, using paginated requests scoped to the provided projects. Second, it ranks all candidate values against the query using one of several configurable search strategies, including semantic embedding, regex pattern matching, and approximate string matching, and returns the top-K matches 5Figure 3. JiraAnchor pipeline. Given a field name and natural language value mention, the tool fetches candidate values from the live Jira instance, computes embedding-based similarity scores, and returns top-10 matches ( K=10 ) ranked by cosine similarity. 

(K=10 ) with their exact names, ready for direct use in JQL. In our experiments we use the embedding strategy, which computes cosine similarity between the query and candidate value embeddings. For example, given the query “Tasks planned for version 6.5,” the agent calls JiraAnchor(field="fixVersion", query="6.5", projects=["QTBUG"]) and re-ceives matches such as "6.5" , "6.5.0" , "6.5.1" , and 

"6.5.0 Beta1" , allowing it to select the correct value rather than guessing. 

4.4. Prompt Design 

Beyond the tools, the system prompt plays a central role in guiding the agent’s query construction decisions. The prompt grounds the agent in the target Jira instance by providing a structured JSON schema containing all JQL field names, supported operators, and enumerated values for fields with fixed vocabularies. For example, issuetype 

lists all 15 valid issue types, priority lists all 7 prior-ity levels, and resolution lists all 9 resolution values (Appendix D lists all 15 fields and their attributes). This eliminates guesswork for fields with small, known value sets. For fields with large or instance-specific value sets, the schema explicitly marks values as truncated and in-structs the agent to use JiraAnchor rather than synthe-sizing values. The fields component , fixVersion ,

affectedVersion , and labels all carry this annota-tion. This design separates the concerns of value grounding (handled by JiraAnchor) from query construction (handled by the LLM), ensuring that the agent consults the live in-stance for values it cannot know from static context. The prompt also provides field aliases that normalize com-mon natural language mentions to their canonical JQL names, such as “fix version” to fixVersion and “compo-nents” to component . The agent is instructed to always execute queries via Jira Search rather than returning JQL as plain text, and to make reasonable assumptions rather than asking clarifying questions. The full system prompt is provided in Appendix C. 

# 5. Experiments 

5.1. Experimental Setup Datasets. Two evaluation sets are used, both derived from the Jackal benchmark (Frank et al., 2025). Jackal-1K (Sec-tion 3.1) is a stratified 1,000-query subset with 250 queries per NL variant (Long NL, Short NL, Semantically Exact, Semantically Similar), balanced across clause counts; it is used in Experiment 1 to evaluate overall agentic execution accuracy. The Field-Value Evaluation Set (Section 3.2) contains 217 minimal 2-clause queries spanning three categorical fields ( fixVersion , affectedVersion ,

component ), entirely disjoint from Jackal-1K; it is used in Experiment 2 to isolate the contribution of JiraAnchor. 

Baselines. Each experiment compares the proposed sys-tem against a controlled ablation. In Experiment 1, the baseline is naive single-turn generation : the model receives a schema-grounded prompt and produces JQL in a single forward pass without tool access or execution feedback, fol-lowing the original Jackal evaluation protocol (Frank et al., 2025). In Experiment 2, the baseline is the full agentic system with JiraAnchor removed: all prompt references to JiraAnchor are stripped and the tool is unbound, while all other MCP tools remain available. 6Sem. Exact Long NL Short NL Sem. Similar 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Execution Accuracy
> 0.947
> 0.835
> 0.434
> 0.283
> 0.970
> 0.839
> 0.473
> 0.296

Naive 

Agentic Figure 4. Average execution accuracy by query variant (9 models). Short NL shows the largest agentic gain (improvement of 3.9%), while Sem. Exact is near ceiling for both conditions (improvement of 2.3%). 

Metrics. All experiments use execution accuracy (EX) 

as the primary metric. A predicted JQL query is correct if, when executed against the live Jira instance, it returns the same set of issue keys as the gold query. This metric is robust to syntactic variation and semantically equivalent rewrites, directly measuring whether the generated query retrieves the intended issues. 

Models. We evaluate 9 frontier LLMs spanning four providers in both experiments: GPT-5.2, GPT-4o, GPT-5 Mini, and GPT-OSS 120B (OpenAI); Claude Sonnet 4.5 and Claude Opus 4.6 (Anthropic); Gemini 3 Flash and Gemini 3 Pro (Google); and Pixtral Large (Mistral). 

Infrastructure. All agentic runs use the architecture de-scribed in Section 4, executed within the same agent envi-ronment. Inference uses each provider’s default decoding settings with temperature 0 where supported. Each query is evaluated in a single run (no majority voting or repeated sampling). The two experiments use different prompts tai-lored to their respective evaluation goals (see below). 

5.2. Experiment 1: Naive Compared to Agentic 

Each model is evaluated on Jackal-1K (Section 3.1) under two conditions with different prompts. In the naive con-dition, the model receives the original Jackal benchmark prompt (Frank et al., 2025): a schema-grounded system prompt containing JQL field definitions, operators, and enu-merated values, which instructs the model to generate JQL                                   

> Model Naive Agentic ∆
> Gemini 3 Flash .628 .710 +.082
> Gemini 3 Pro .641 .671 +.030 GPT-5 Mini .616 .638 +.022 Claude Opus 4.6 .634 .653 +.019 Pixtral Large .537 .554 +.017 GPT-5.2 .659 .670 +.011 Claude Sonnet 4.5 .633 .644 +.011 GPT-OSS 120B .630 .624 −.006 GPT-4o .643 .634 −.009
> Average .625 .644 +.020
> Table 1. Overall execution accuracy, naive compared to agentic on Jackal-1K. Seven of nine models improve. Table 7 (Appendix) provides full per-variant detail.

directly as plain text in a single pass without tool access. In the agentic condition, the model receives a tool-augmented prompt (Section 4) that shares the same underlying JQL schema but additionally includes tool-use instructions (di-recting the model to execute queries via Jira Search and to call JiraAnchor for categorical value resolution), field aliases, and chain-of-thought scaffolding for ambiguous field selection. The naive condition was re-evaluated by us on the Jackal-1K subset using the original prompt to ensure an apples-to-apples comparison on the same queries. Table 1 reports results. Across models, the agentic approach improves the average from 62.5% to 64.4% overall, an improvement of 2.0%, 7Fix Version Affected Version Components    

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Execution Accuracy
> 0.631 0.662
> 0.169
> 0.730 0.759
> 0.662
> Baseline Agent
> Agent w/ JiraAnchor Figure 5. Average execution accuracy by categorical field (9 models). JiraAnchor yields the largest gain on component queries (improve-ment of 49.3%), where baseline accuracy without value grounding collapses to 16.9%.

with gains concentrated on Short NL (improvement of 3.9%). The best individual result is Gemini 3 Flash, which improves from 62.8% to 71.0% overall, an improvement of 8.2%, driven by a large gain on Short NL (improvement of 17.3%). Seven of nine models improve under the agentic approach, while two show slight regressions; we analyze per-variant patterns and failure cases in Section 5.4. 

5.3. Experiment 2: JiraAnchor Ablation 

To isolate JiraAnchor’s contribution to field-value resolu-tion, we run a controlled ablation on the field-value evalua-tion set (Section 3.2). Each model is evaluated under two conditions. Both conditions use a minimal, field-specific prompt scoped to the target categorical field (e.g., project 

+ fixVersion only). In the with JiraAnchor condition, the prompt instructs the model to call JiraAnchor to re-solve the field value before constructing JQL, and the tool is bound to the agent. In the without JiraAnchor condition, all JiraAnchor references are removed from the prompt text (e.g., valuesNote changes from “Use search jira values to find exact values” to “use exact value from user query”), and the tool is removed from the agent’s tool bindings. All other MCP tools remain available in both conditions. This design cleanly isolates the marginal contribution of semantic field-value retrieval from the base agentic capability. Table 2 reports results across 9 models and three categorical fields. Overall, JiraAnchor improves accuracy from 48.7% to 71.7%. The largest gain occurs on component 

queries, where accuracy rises from 16.9% to 66.2%. Version fields show moderate but consistent improve-                                  

> Model Baseline w/ JiraAnchor ∆
> GPT-5 Mini .393 .710 +.317
> GPT-5.2 .416 .705 +.289 Pixtral Large .453 .742 +.289 Claude Sonnet 4.5 .462 .733 +.271 GPT-4o .449 .710 +.261 Gemini 3 Pro .527 .742 +.215 GPT-OSS 120B .458 .645 +.187 Gemini 3 Flash .601 .733 +.132 Claude Opus 4.6 .628 .733 +.105
> Average .487 .717 +.230
> Table 2. Overall execution accuracy with and without JiraAnchor across 9 models. All models show positive gains. Table 8 (Ap-pendix) provides full per-field detail.

ments: affectedVersion from 66.2% to 75.9% and 

fixVersion from 63.1% to 73.0%. All 9 models show positive overall deltas, with GPT-5 Mini gaining the most (improvement of 31.7%). 

Impact by field type. JiraAnchor is most effective on component queries, where accuracy without the tool col-lapses to 16.9% across models. Component names in the target Jira instance follow non-obvious naming conventions (e.g., “Build tools: Other”, “QML: Tooling”), and without access to the live value set, models consistently generate plausible but incorrect values. JiraAnchor resolves this by querying the instance for exact component names, enabling all 9 evaluated models to exceed 61% accuracy on these queries. 8NL Mention Without With JiraAnchor        

> “7.0” field: fixVersion
> ‘‘7.0’’
> 0 results
> ‘‘7.0 (Next Major Release)’’
> correct “build tools” field: component
> ‘‘build tools’’
> 0 results
> ‘‘Build tools: Other’’
> correct “QDS 1.6 Beta” field: fixVersion not resolved ‘‘QDS 1.6 Beta’’
> correct

Table 3. JiraAnchor success cases. Each row isolates a single field-value mention. Without JiraAnchor, the agent guesses a value that does not exist; with it, the canonical stored form is retrieved. 

For version fields, the improvement is moderate but consis-tent. Version names frequently include suffixes or qualifiers that the model cannot predict from the natural language alone (e.g., “7.0 (Next Major Release)” instead of “7.0”, “QDS 1.6 Beta” instead of “1.6”). JiraAnchor retrieves the full value set and matches the user’s mention to the canon-ical name, recovering queries that would otherwise return empty result sets. 

Per-field regressions. While JiraAnchor improves overall accuracy for all 9 evaluated models, it introduces regressions in specific model-field combinations. The most notable case is Gemini 3 Flash on fix versions (71.0% with JiraAnchor compared to 79.0% without, a regression of 8.0%), even as the same model gains an improvement of 41.3% on compo-nents. We trace per-field regressions to three patterns. Overmatching occurs when the tool returns a broader ver-sion name than the gold query expects (e.g., “4.7” instead of “4.7.0”), causing the agent to use the shorter value and return zero results. Field confusion arises when the tool correctly identifies a value but the agent assigns it to the wrong field (e.g., affectedVersion instead of fixVersion ), an ambiguity in the natural language that the tool exacerbates by increasing the agent’s confidence in an incorrect choice. Unnecessary invocation occurs when the natural language already contains the exact JQL value, and invoking JiraAn-chor returns a different match, degrading a query that would have been correct without intervention. These patterns suggest that selective invocation, where the agent decides whether to call JiraAnchor based on the confi-dence of its initial value, could reduce per-field regressions while preserving the strong overall gains. 

5.4. Error Taxonomy 

Drawing from a manual analysis of failure cases across models and query variants, we identify six dominant error categories (Figure 6). All percentages below refer to the Sem. Exact Long NL Short NL Sem. Similar       

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Proportion of Failures (%)
> 6%
> 20%
> 41%
> 4%
> 31%
> 19%
> 4%
> 7%
> 8%
> 7%
> 12%
> 6%
> 45%
> 21%
> 8% 4%
> 55% 58%
> 22% 22%
> n=38 n=115 n=595 n=721
> Issue Type Interp.
> Text Field Selection
> Version Confusion
> Missing Fields
> Agent Error
> Other

Figure 6. Error taxonomy for Agentic Jackal failures by query variant. Each bar shows the proportion of failures attributed to six error categories. On the hardest variants (Short NL and Sem. Similar), semantic interpretation errors dominate: Issue Type Interp. 

(e.g., “bugs” as issuetype=Bug vs. text search), Text Field Selection (summary vs. description ), and Version Confusion 

(affectedVersion vs. fixVersion ). These are inherent ambiguities that tools cannot resolve. 

9Naive Agentic Model Lat. (s) Tok. (avg) Lat. (s) Tok. (avg) Tool Calls                                                                                    

> GPT-OSS 120B 2.3 1,928 37.6 39,340 1.7 GPT-4o 2.6 1,573 30.5 20,395 1.2 Gemini 3 Flash 2.8 1,532 29.9 20,085 1.3 GPT-5.2 2.9 1,574 29.4 17,549 1.0
> Pixtral Large 3.2 1,487 20.1 17,473 1.0
> Claude Sonnet 4.5 3.2 2,404 33.9 37,603 1.2 Claude Opus 4.6 3.7 2,395 41.3 34,582 1.5 GPT-5 Mini 9.1 1,962 39.1 37,470 1.3 Gemini 3 Pro 13.5 1,746 30.2 20,140 1.2
> Average 4.8 1,845 32.4 27,182 1.3
> Table 4. Operational cost per query, Experiment 1 (Jackal-1K). Lat. = latency, Tok. = total tokens. Bold = lowest per column.
> JiraAnchor Baseline Model Lat. (s) Tok. (avg) TC Lat. (s) Tok. (avg) TC
> GPT-OSS 120B 26.6 60,964 2.0 8.6 25,318 1.1 GPT-5.2 36.3 18,546 2.0 8.4 13,400 1.0
> GPT-4o 44.8 23,941 2.0 8.5 23,885 1.0
> Gemini 3 Flash 45.9 23,349 2.0 11.6 25,683 1.7 Gemini 3 Pro 45.1 25,077 2.1 13.8 14,578 1.0 Claude Sonnet 4.5 48.7 55,547 2.0 19.1 66,288 1.2 Pixtral Large 54.0 35,721 2.0 18.9 22,176 1.0 Claude Opus 4.6 69.5 69,832 2.1 38.2 65,180 1.7 GPT-5 Mini 103.6 48,560 2.0 37.9 35,319 1.0
> Average 52.7 40,171 2.0 18.3 32,425 1.2
> Table 5. Operational cost per query, Experiment 2 (field-value eval-uation). Lat. = latency, Tok. = total tokens, TC = tool calls. Bold = lowest per column.

proportion of failures within each query variant. • Issue Type Interpretation. When the user says “bugs,” the gold JQL uses summary ˜"bug" (text search), while the agent interprets this as issuetype = Bug . This is the single largest category on Sem. Similar (41%) and accounts for 20% of Short NL fail-ures, reflecting a dataset convention rather than a gen-uine agent error. • Text Field Selection. The natural language pro-vides no reliable signal to distinguish summary from 

description as the target field for text search. The gold JQL assigns these arbitrarily. This category ac-counts for 31% of Short NL and 19% of Sem. Similar failures. • Version Confusion. The agent confuses 

affectedVersion with fixVersion when the natural language does not disambiguate (e.g., “version 6.5”). This accounts for 8% of Sem. Similar, 7% of Short NL, and 4% of Long NL failures. • Missing Fields. The agent omits a clause present in the gold JQL, typically a secondary filter that the natural language implies only weakly. This accounts for 12% of Short NL, 7% of Long NL, and 6% of Sem. Similar failures. • Agent Error. The agent produces a malformed query, hits the recursion limit, or fails to call the appropriate tool. This accounts for 45% of Sem. Exact failures (second only to Other), 21% of Long NL, and 8% of Short NL, but is negligible on Sem. Similar (4%). • Other. Residual errors including resolution mis-matches (e.g., resolution IS EMPTY compared to a specific set of values), priority mapping ambigui-ties, and semantic paraphrase failures where the agent interprets a synonym literally. This category accounts for 22% of Short NL and Sem. Similar, 58% of Long NL, and 55% of Sem. Exact failures. A key finding is that the three semantic interpretation cate-gories (Issue Type Interpretation, Text Field Selection, and Version Confusion) together account for 58% of Short NL and 68% of Sem. Similar failures. These stem from inher-ent ambiguities in the natural language or conventions in the benchmark construction, rather than deficiencies in the agent or its tools. The agent’s tools address value lookup effectively, but the dominant failure modes are semantic interpretation challenges that require additional context be-yond what any tool can provide. 

5.5. Operational Cost 

Tables 4 and 5 report the average latency, token usage, and tool call count per query for each model on Experiments 1 and 2, respectively. In Experiment 1, the agentic approach increases average latency from 4.8s to 32.4s (+27.6s) and average token con-sumption from 1.8K to 27.2K ( ∼15 ×). The latency over-head is dominated by LLM inference across multiple itera-tions rather than Jira API round-trips, as evidenced by the modest 1.3 average tool calls per query: most queries re-solve in a single generate-execute cycle. The naive baseline is notably cheap (1.5–2.4K tokens, 2–14s), since it produces JQL in a single forward pass with no tool interaction. To-ken consumption in the agentic setting varies substantially across models, from roughly 17K (GPT-5.2, Pixtral Large) to 39K (GPT-OSS 120B), reflecting differences in prompt encoding efficiency and chain-of-thought verbosity. In Experiment 2, JiraAnchor adds exactly one tool call on 10 average (2.0 with compared to 1.2 without), corresponding to the single-call retrieval design described in Section 4.3. This extra call increases average latency from 18.3s to 52.7s (+34.4s), with the additional time spent fetching all candi-date field values from the Jira REST API and computing similarity scores. Token usage increases modestly from 32K to 40K on average. The latency overhead is acceptable for interactive use cases and could be reduced through caching of field-value embeddings across queries within the same project. 

# 6. Discussion 

The two experiments reveal complementary strengths of the agentic approach. JiraAnchor delivers large, consistent gains on field-value queries (improvement of 23.0% overall, improvement of 49.3% on components), demonstrating that live value grounding is essential when instance-specific cat-egorical values cannot be inferred from model training data. The agentic execution loop, by contrast, provides selective rather than uniform improvement: gains are concentrated on Short NL queries (improvement of 3.9% average), where minimal context forces the model to make assumptions that iterative execution can correct, while Long NL queries show marginal change (improvement of 0.3%) due to occasional over-refinement of already-correct queries. The overall improvement in Experiment 1 (improvement of 2.0% across 9 models) is variant-dependent: the agentic approach is most valuable on under-specified queries (Short NL, Semantically Similar) where execution feedback com-pensates for linguistic ambiguity, but provides little advan-tage on unambiguous inputs (Semantically Exact) and can occasionally harm performance on well-specified queries (Long NL) through unnecessary refinement. The error taxonomy further clarifies the boundary of what tools can and cannot address. The dominant failure modes (Issue Type Interpretation, 41% of Sem. Similar failures; Text Field Selection, 31% of Short NL failures; and Version Confusion) are semantic interpretation challenges rooted in inherent ambiguities in the natural language or conventions in the benchmark construction. These cannot be resolved by additional tool calls or execution feedback; they require ei-ther user clarification or richer contextual grounding beyond the current tool suite. From a practical standpoint, our cost analysis shows that the agentic approach incurs a ∼7× latency increase and 

∼15 × token increase per query compared to naive gener-ation, while JiraAnchor adds one additional tool call with a ∼3× latency overhead. For deployments where accu-racy on ambiguous queries justifies the added cost, the full agentic system with JiraAnchor is recommended. For latency-sensitive or cost-constrained settings, a hybrid strat-egy (naive generation for well-formed queries with selective agentic fallback for ambiguous inputs) may offer a better trade-off. The per-field regressions observed with JiraAn-chor further motivate confidence-based selective invocation as a direction for future work. 

# 7. Limitations 

While Agentic Jackal advances text-to-JQL through live exe-cution and semantic value grounding, several limitations re-main. All experiments run against a single Jira instance, but we mitigate this by evaluating on a large-scale deployment with 22 projects, 200,000+ issues, and diverse field schemas, and by stratifying queries across clause counts, field types, and NL variants to ensure broad coverage. The agentic exe-cution loop introduces latency and token overhead (approxi-mately 7 × and 15 ×, respectively), but most queries resolve in a single generate-execute cycle (1.3 average tool calls), and prompt caching (Lumer et al., 2026b) can further reduce multi-turn token costs by reusing cached system prompt and schema prefixes. JiraAnchor’s embedding-based value resolution can over-match when candidate values are se-mantically close (e.g., “4.7” and “4.7.0”), contributing to per-field regressions in Experiment 2, but the tool still deliv-ers a net improvement of 23.0 percentage points across all 9 models, and incorporating structured matching heuristics alongside embedding similarity could improve precision on version-style values in future iterations. 

# 8. Conclusion 

We introduce Agentic Jackal, a tool-augmented multi-step agent that equips LLMs with live Jira query execution via the Jira MCP server, and JiraAnchor, a novel semantic field-value retrieval tool that resolves natural language mentions of categorical values against a live Jira instance using grep-based and embedding-based similarity search. Naive single-turn LLMs that generate queries without tool access cannot discover which categorical field values actually exist in a given instance and cannot verify or refine their output against a live data source, limiting accuracy on ambiguous or paraphrased user requests. We evaluate 9 frontier LLMs on Jackal-1K, a 1,000-query stratified subset of the Jackal benchmark, across two execution accuracy experiments. Ji-raAnchor improves average field-value query accuracy from 48.7% to 71.7% across 9 models and three categorical fields, with component accuracy rising from 16.9% to 66.2%. The full agentic approach improves seven of nine models, with gains concentrated on the most linguistically challenging query variants, including a 9.0% relative improvement on Short NL queries. Manual error analysis reveals that seman-tic interpretation ambiguities (issue type disambiguation, text field selection, and version confusion) account for 58% of Short NL and 68% of Semantically Similar failures, in-11 dicating that dominant errors stem from inherent natural language ambiguity rather than value resolution failures. These findings motivate future research into intent-level disambiguation through user clarification mechanisms and prompt-cache strategies, complementing continued improve-ments in enterprise Jira query generation. 12 References 

Atlassian. Atlassian intelligence. https: //www.atlassian.com/platform/ artificial-intelligence , 2025a. Accessed: 2025. Atlassian. Advanced searching using JQL. 

https://support.atlassian.com/ jira-service-management-cloud/docs/ use-advanced-search-with-jql/ , 2025b. Accessed: 2025. Atlassian. MCP server for Jira. https://github.com/ atlassian/mcp-server-jira , 2025c. Accessed: 2025. Clovity. JQL AI assistant for Jira. https:// marketplace.atlassian.com/ , 2025. Atlassian Marketplace. Accessed: 2025. Frank, K., Gulati, A., Lumer, E., Campagna, S., and Sub-biah, V. K. Jackal: A real-world execution-based bench-mark evaluating large language models on text-to-jql tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23579 , 2025. Gulati, A., Sen, S., Sarguroh, W., and Paul, K. Beyond rows to reasoning: Agentic retrieval for multimodal spreadsheet understanding and editing, 2026. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.06503 .Heule, S., Jia, E., and Jain, N. Improving agent with semantic search. https://cursor.com/blog/ semsearch , 2025. Cursor research blog post. Huang, N. How agents can use filesystems for context engineering. LangChain Blog, 2025. URL http:// bit.ly/41suMqx . Accessed: 2025. Kamoi, R., Zhang, Y., Zhang, N., Han, J., and Zhang, R. When can LLMs actually correct their own mistakes? a critical survey of self-correction of LLMs. Transac-tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,12:1417–1440, 2024. Kulkarni, S. Text2JQL. https://huggingface. co/datasets/shreyaskulkarni/Text2JQL ,2023a. Accessed: 2025. Kulkarni, S. Text2JQL v2. https://huggingface. co/datasets/shreyaskulkarni/Text2JQL_ v2 , 2023b. Accessed: 2025. Lei, F., Chen, J., Ye, Y., Cao, R., Shin, D., Su, H., Suo, Z., Gao, H., Hu, W., Yin, P., et al. Spider 2.0: Evaluating language models on real-world enterprise text-to-SQL workflows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.07763 , 2025. Li, J., Hui, B., Qu, G., Yang, J., Li, B., Li, B., Wang, B., Qin, B., Geng, R., Huo, N., et al. Can LLM already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-SQLs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Lumer, E., Subbiah, V. K., Burke, J. A., Basavaraju, P. H., and Huber, A. Toolshed: Scale tool-equipped agents with advanced rag-tool fusion and tool knowledge bases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14594 , 2024. Lumer, E., Gulati, A., Nizar, F., Hedroits, D., Mehta, A., Hwangbo, H., Subbiah, V. K., Basavaraju, P. H., and Burke, J. A. Tool and agent selection for large language model agents in production: A survey. 2025a. Lumer, E., Gulati, A., Subbiah, V. K., Basavaraju, P. H., and Burke, J. A. Memtool: Optimizing short-term memory management for dynamic tool calling in llm agent multi-turn conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21428 ,2025b. Lumer, E., Melich, M., Zino, O., Kim, E., Dieter, S., Basavaraju, P. H., Subbiah, V. K., Burke, J. A., and Her-nandez, R. Rethinking retrieval: From traditional retrieval augmented generation to agentic and non-vector reason-ing systems in the financial domain for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18177 , 2025c. Lumer, E., Nizar, F., Gulati, A., Basavaraju, P. H., and Subbiah, V. K. Tool-to-agent retrieval: Bridging tools and agents for scalable llm multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01854 , 2025d. Lumer, E., Gulati, A., Subbiah, V. K., Basavaraju, P. H., and Burke, J. A. Scalemcp: Dynamic and auto-synchronizing model context protocol tools for llm agents. In Marcel-loni, F., Madani, K., van Stein, N., and Filipe, J. (eds.), 

Computational Intelligence , pp. 23–42, Cham, 2026a. Springer Nature Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-032-15632-7. Lumer, E., Nizar, F., Jangiti, A., Frank, K., Gulati, A., Phadate, M., and Subbiah, V. K. Don’t break the cache: An evaluation of prompt caching for long-horizon agentic tasks, 2026b. Nan, Y., Sun, H., Zhuang, Z., Qi, Q., Chu, G., Liao, J., Pei, D., and Wang, J. DIVER: A robust text-to-SQL sys-tem with dynamic interactive value linking and evidence reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2026 International Con-ference on Management of Data (SIGMOD) , 2026. doi: 10.1145/3786640. Nizar, F., Lumer, E., Gulati, A., Basavaraju, P. H., and Subbiah, V. K. Agent-as-a-graph: Knowledge graph-based tool and agent retrieval for llm multi-agent systems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18194 , 2025. 13 Patil, S. G., Mao, H., Yan, F., Ji, C. C., Suresh, V., Stoica, I., and Gonzalez, J. E. The berkeley function calling leaderboard (bfcl): From tool use to agentic evaluation of large language models. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=2GmDdhBdDk .Pourreza, M. and Rafiei, D. DIN-SQL: Decomposed in-context learning of text-to-SQL with self-correction. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2023. Talaei, S., Pourreza, M., Chang, Y.-C., Mirhoseini, A., and Saberi, A. CHESS: Contextual harnessing for efficient SQL synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16755 , 2024. Wang, B., Ren, C., Yang, J., Liang, X., Bai, J., Chai, L., Yan, Z., Zhang, Q.-W., Yin, D., Sun, X., and Li, Z. MAC-SQL: A multi-agent collaborative framework for text-to-SQL. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11242 , 2024. Wang, Y. et al. Enterprise large language model bench-marking for software engineering tasks. arXiv preprint ,2025. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., and Cao, Y. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, 2023. Yu, T., Zhang, R., Yang, K., Yasunaga, M., Wang, D., Li, Z., Ma, J., Li, I., Yao, Q., Roman, S., et al. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-SQL task. In Pro-ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 3911–3921, 2018. Zhong, V., Xiong, C., and Socher, R. Seq2SQL: Generating structured queries from natural language using reinforce-ment learning, 2017. 14 A. Full JQL Query Examples 

Table 6 presents representative JQL queries at varying clause complexities, each paired with four natural language request variants. These examples are drawn from the Jackal benchmark (Frank et al., 2025) and illustrate the range of linguistic variation in the evaluation data. Table 6: JQL queries with increasing clause complexity, each paired with four natural language request variants. 

Clauses JQL Long NL Sem. Exact Sem. Similar Short NL 

2 updated <= -90d AND issuetype in ("Epic") 

I’m checking for epics that haven’t been updated in the last 90 days, so we can identify any long-standing items that might need attention or could potentially be closed. Updated is less than or equal to 90 days ago, and issue type is Epic Large-scale tasks that haven’t been changed in the last three months Epics inactive for 90+ days 3 created >= -4w AND assignee is EMPTY AND issuetype in ("User Story") 

I’m checking for any user stories that have been created in the last four weeks but haven’t been assigned to anyone yet, so we can make sure nothing important is slipping through the cracks. Created is within the last 4 weeks, assignee is empty, and issue type is User Story Stories added in the last month that haven’t been assigned to anyone yet Unassigned user stories created in last 4 weeks 4 updated >= "2025-01-01" AND issuetype in ("Bug") AND priority is not EMPTY AND description ˜"crash" 

I’m searching for bug reports that have been updated since the start of 2025, specifically those that mention a crash in their description and have a priority set. This helps me focus on recent and prioritized crash-related issues that might need urgent attention. Updated is on or after 2025-01-01, issue type is Bug, priority is not empty, and description contains crash Problems flagged as bugs, with a set urgency level, mentioning crashes, and modified after the start of 2025 Bugs with priority and crash in description updated since 2025 5 updated <= "2025-01-01" AND description ˜"error" AND affectedVersion is not EMPTY AND resolution is EMPTY AND issuetype in ("Epic", "User Story", "Task", "Sub-task") 

I’m looking for any Epics, User Stories, Tasks, or Sub-tasks that mention ‘error’ in their description, have at least one affected version specified, haven’t been resolved yet, and were last updated on or before January 1st, 2025. Updated is on or before 2025-01-01, description contains error, affected version is not empty, resolution is empty, and issue type is Epic, User Story, Task, or Sub-task Items that mention an error, haven’t been resolved yet, are linked to a specific version, and were last changed before January 2025, covering all major and minor work categories. Unresolved issues with error in description 

Note: Each JQL query is paired with four natural language variants: Long NL (extended description with context), Semantically Exact (literal mapping to JQL), Semantically Similar (paraphrased intent), and Short NL (concise label). 

# B. NL Variant Generation Prompts 

The Jackal benchmark (Frank et al., 2025) generates four natural language variants per JQL query using the prompt templates below. Each template enforces a distinct level of abstraction, from literal translation to creative paraphrase. 

B.1. Long Natural Language (Long NL) 

Task: Convert a JQL query into a longer natural language sentence or paragraph. Include context or reasoning that someone might give when discussing the query aloud. Vary the style, making some 

15 responses conversational or explanatory. Examples: 1. JQL: project = QTBUG AND issuetype = Bug AND status = "Open" NL: I’m reviewing all open bugs in the QTBUG project so we can track unresolved issues before the next sprint. 2. JQL: created >= -5d AND project = PYSIDE NL: I want to look at issues reported in the last 5 days in the PYSIDE project to see what’s newly come in. Given this JQL: {jql} OUTPUT FORMAT: Only respond with the natural language. Do not include any additional text or explanations. 

B.2. Short Natural Language (Short NL) 

Task: Convert a JQL query into a concise natural language phrase, just a few words. Prefer minimal and direct expressions. Examples: 1. JQL: project = QDS AND priority = "P0: Blocker" NL: QDS blockers 2. JQL: resolution = Duplicate NL: Duplicate issues Given this JQL: {jql} OUTPUT FORMAT: Only respond with the natural language. Do not include any additional text or explanations. 

B.3. Semantically Similar 

Task: Convert the following JQL query into a natural language sentence that expresses the same intent, but uses different wording. Do not directly reuse JQL field names or values. Instead, rephrase using synonyms, conversational language, or implied meaning. Be creative, but maintain accuracy. Examples: 1. JQL: status = "Open" NL: Tickets that are still in progress 2. JQL: resolution = Duplicate NL: Issues already reported before Given this JQL: {jql} OUTPUT FORMAT: Only respond with the natural language. Do not include any additional text or explanations. 

16 B.4. Semantically Exact 

Task: Translate a JQL query into a natural language sentence that mirrors the JQL structure and wording as closely as possible. Do not paraphrase or add unnecessary context. Use literal conversions of fields and values, preserving the order and logic. Examples: 1. JQL: project = QTBUG AND issuetype = Bug AND status = "Open" NL: Project is QTBUG, issue type is Bug, and status is Open 2. JQL: priority = "P1: Critical" NL: Priority is P1: Critical Given this JQL: {jql} OUTPUT FORMAT: Only respond with the natural language. Do not include any additional text or explanations. 

# C. Agentic System Prompt 

The following is an abridged version of the schema-grounded system prompt provided to the agent at every turn. The prompt encodes the complete Jira field schema, disambiguation heuristics for ambiguous natural language, and explicit instructions for tool use. Double braces ( {{ ... }} ) are Python str.format escapes that render as single braces at runtime. 

C.1. Core Instructions 

You are a Jira assistant. When users ask questions about Jira issues: 1. Generate valid JQL (Jira Query Language) using only fields from the SCHEMA below 2. ALWAYS use ‘jira_search‘ to execute the final query - never return JQL as plain text 3. Don’t ask clarifying questions - make reasonable assumptions when details are ambiguous 

C.2. Field Disambiguation Rules (Excerpt) 

FIELD RULES (for ambiguous natural language): Priority: - Hierarchy: P0 (Blocker) > P1 (Critical) > P2 (Important) > P3 (Somewhat important) > P4 (Low) > P5 (Not important) - Exact value names ("P4", "Critical") -> match exactly - "high priority" / "urgent" -> typically P1 or P2 - "low priority" / "minor" -> typically P4 or P5 Resolution: - "unresolved" / "open" / "not resolved" -> resolution IS EMPTY - "resolved" / "closed" / "completed" -> resolution IS NOT EMPTY Version fields: - affectedVersion = where bug was FOUND - fixVersion = where fix is TARGETED 

17 Labels vs Component: - labels = user-applied tags (e.g., tech-debt, needs-triage) - component = code modules/subsystems (e.g., Billing, API Gateway) 

C.3. Text Search Guidelines 

TEXT SEARCH (choosing between summary and description): Step 1: Generate BOTH complete JQL options: - JQL A (summary): [full JQL using summary ˜ "term"] - JQL B (description): [full JQL using description ˜ "term"] Step 2: Compare both to the user’s query: - summary = short titles, issue names, keywords - description = detailed explanations, logs, technical details Step 3: Use the better JQL in jira_search. Never use both fields together. 

C.4. Tool Usage Directives 

TOOL USAGE (JiraAnchor): When user mentions a SPECIFIC value but exact Jira name is unclear: 1. Call JiraAnchor to find the exact value name 2. Then call jira_search with that exact value in JQL CALL JiraAnchor when: - Version numbers: "5.0", "3.2.1" -> search fixVersion/affectedVersion - Technical terms that could be components: "Networking", "Payments" - Tag-like terms: "tech-debt", "flaky-test" -> search labels DO NOT use for existence checks ("issues without labels" -> labels IS EMPTY) 

C.5. Embedded Schema (Abridged) 

The full schema enumerates 15 Jira fields with their JQL keys, types, operators, and allowed values. Fields with large or dynamic value sets ( fixVersion , affectedVersion , component , labels ) include a directive to call JiraAnchor rather than guessing. Appendix D provides the complete field listing. 

# D. Summarized JQL Schema 

This appendix provides a summarized version of the Jira schema used to ground JQL generation. It lists the major fields, their JQL keys, supported operator types, and representative value categories. All project-specific or proprietary values have been omitted. • Issue Type (issuetype) – categorical; operators: =, !=, IN, NOT IN ; example values: Bug, Epic, User Story, Task, Sub-task. • Project (project) – categorical; operators: =, !=, IN, NOT IN ; 22 projects including QTBUG, QDS, PYSIDE. • Components (component) – categorical; operators: =, !=, IN, NOT IN, IS EMPTY, IS NOT EMPTY ;large enum set (214+ values, not listed). 18 • Platforms (custom field) – categorical; operators: =, !=, IN, NOT IN, IS EMPTY, IS NOT EMPTY ; ex-ample values: Windows, Linux, macOS, Android, iOS. • Labels (labels) – categorical; operators: =, !=, IN, NOT IN, IS EMPTY, IS NOT EMPTY ; values drawn from natural language mentions. • Fix Version/s (fixVersion) – categorical; operators: same as Labels; values omitted due to size (397+ per project). • Affects Version/s (affectedVersion) – categorical; operators: same as Labels; values omitted due to size. • Resolution (resolution) – categorical; operators: =, !=, IN, NOT IN, IS EMPTY, IS NOT EMPTY ; ex-ample values: Fixed, Duplicate, Invalid, Won’t Do. • Priority (priority) – categorical; operators: =, !=, IN, NOT IN ; example values: Blocker, Critical, Important, Low. • Summary (summary) – text search; operators: ˜, !˜ .• Description (description) – text search; operators: ˜, !˜ .• Assignee (assignee) – categorical/special; operators: =, !=, IS EMPTY, IS NOT EMPTY .• Created (created) – date; operators: >=, <=, >, <, = ; supports absolute dates (YYYY-MM-DD), relative dates (e.g., -5d, -4w), and functions (e.g., startOfMonth()). • Updated (updated) – date; same operators and hints as Created. • Resolved (resolutiondate) – date; same operators and hints as Created. 

Aliases. Common natural language mentions are normalized to schema keys. For example: “issue type” → issuetype ,“fix version/s” → fixVersion , “affects version/s” → affectedVersion , “components” → component , “platforms” 

→ custom field. 

# E. Agent Transcript Example 

Below is an annotated transcript from the Experiment 2 evaluation (Claude Opus 4.6, component field, with JiraAnchor enabled). It illustrates how the agent decomposes an ambiguous natural language request into parallel JiraAnchor queries, synthesizes the ranked results, and constructs a verified JQL query. Scores are cosine similarity values returned by JiraAnchor’s embedding-based retrieval (see Section 4.3). 

Natural Language Input: “Tasks related to the QTBUG initiative that focus on string handling and Unicode support.” 

Gold JQL: project IN ("QTBUG") AND component IN ("Core: QString and Unicode") 

Step 1. The agent identifies two semantic concepts, “string handling” and “Unicode support,” and issues parallel JiraAnchor queries for each against the 214 component values in project QTBUG. 

Agent → JiraAnchor (parallel call 1) 

{"field": "component", "query": "string handling", "projects": ["QTBUG"] }

Tool Response (top 4 of 10 matches) GUI: Text handling (0.529) GUI: Font handling (0.359) Core: URL Handling (0.348) 

Core: QString and Unicode (0.336) Agent → JiraAnchor (parallel call 2) 

{"field": "component", "query": "Unicode support", "projects": ["QTBUG"] }

19 Tool Response (top 4 of 10 matches) 

Core: QString and Unicode (0.490) 

GUI: Text handling (0.379) GUI: Font handling (0.367) GUI: Complex Input methods (0.341) 

Step 2. The agent cross-references the two result sets. “Core: QString and Unicode” appears in both: rank 4 for “string handling” (0.336) and rank 1 for “Unicode support” (0.490). The agent selects it as the best match for the combined intent and constructs the JQL query. 

Agent → jira search 

{"jql": "project = QTBUG AND component = \"Core: QString and Unicode \"" }

Tool Response: Returns 10 issues. Non-empty result set confirms the query is valid. 

Gold JQL: project IN ("QTBUG") AND component IN ("Core: QString and Unicode") 

Agent JQL: project = QTBUG AND component = "Core: QString and Unicode" 

Evaluation: Execution-equivalent to gold query. Correct. 

Key observations: (1) The correct component was not the top-ranked result for “string handling” (rank 4), but ranked first for “Unicode support.” By issuing parallel queries for both concepts, the agent identified the single component that satisfied both aspects of the request. (2) The agent verified the constructed query via jira search before returning, confirming non-empty results. 

Comparison: Same query without JiraAnchor. When the same model (Claude Opus 4.6) processes the identical input without JiraAnchor, it cannot discover “Core: QString and Unicode” and must guess from context alone: 

Without JiraAnchor: 22 messages, 21+ tool calls 

Steps 1–3: Agent tries component = "Core: String" , component = "Core: Unicode" , etc. All return 0 results .Steps 4–7: Agent searches field metadata, then tries text searches: summary ˜ "string" , summary ˜ "unicode" . Most return 0 results. Steps 8–10: Agent discovers partial matches under component = "GUI: Text handling" and settles on this value. Final JQL: project = QTBUG AND component = "GUI: Text handling" AND (summary ˜ "string" OR summary ˜ "unicode" OR summary ˜ "QString") 

Result: Incorrect. Wrong component, compensated with text filters, different result set. Without JiraAnchor, the agent consumed 7 × more tool calls, still selected the wrong component, and produced an incorrect result. With JiraAnchor, the same model resolved the correct value in 2 parallel calls and verified the query in a third. 

# F. Full Experiment Results 

Table 7 provides the complete per-variant breakdown for Experiment 1, and Table 8 provides the per-field breakdown for Experiment 2. 20 Naive Agentic ∆ (Agentic − Naive) Model Overall Overall Overall Long NL Short NL Sem. Exact Sem. Similar 

Gemini 3 Flash .628 .710 +.082 +.067 +.173 +.059 +.028 Gemini 3 Pro .641 .671 +.030 −.024 +.091 +.012 +.039 GPT-5 Mini .616 .638 +.022 −.035 +.063 +.020 +.040 Claude Opus 4.6 .634 .653 +.019 −.035 +.047 +.020 +.044 

Pixtral Large .537 .554 +.017 +.036 −.008 +.126 −.087 GPT-5.2 .659 .670 +.011 +.040 +.008 −.004 .000 Claude Sonnet 4.5 .633 .644 +.011 +.039 −.023 +.043 −.016 GPT-OSS 120B .630 .624 −.006 −.027 +.028 −.067 +.044 

GPT-4o .643 .634 −.009 −.032 −.024 −.004 +.024 

Average .625 .644 +.020 +.003 +.039 +.023 +.013 

Table 7. Full per-variant execution accuracy, Experiment 1. ∆ columns show the change (agentic − naive) for each query variant. Bold marks the best value per column. 

Fix Version Affected Version Components Overall Avg. Model Base +JA ∆ Base +JA ∆ Base +JA ∆ Base +JA ∆

Claude Sonnet 4.5 .639 .736 +.097 .611 .764 +.153 .137 .699 +.562 .462 .733 +.271 Claude Opus 4.6 .736 .778 +.042 .722 .778 +.056 .425 .644 +.219 .628 .733 +.105 Gemini 3 Flash .790 .710 −.080 .806 .871 +.065 .206 .619 +.413 .601 .733 +.132 Gemini 3 Pro .667 .722 +.055 .694 .792 +.098 .219 .712 +.493 .527 .742 +.215 GPT-4o .569 .736 +.167 .667 .750 +.083 .110 .644 +.534 .449 .710 +.261 GPT-5.2 .556 .750 +.194 .583 .736 +.153 .110 .630 +.520 .416 .705 +.289 GPT-5 Mini .542 .750 +.208 .569 .722 +.153 .068 .658 +.590 .393 .710 +.317 

GPT-OSS 120B .611 .667 +.056 .639 .639 .000 .123 .630 +.507 .458 .645 +.187 Pixtral Large .569 .722 +.153 .667 .778 +.111 .123 .726 +.603 .453 .742 +.289 

Average .631 .730 +.099 .662 .759 +.097 .169 .662 +.493 .487 .717 +.230 

Table 8. Full per-field execution accuracy, Experiment 2 (JiraAnchor ablation). Base = Baseline Agent (without JiraAnchor), +JA = Agent with JiraAnchor. Bold marks the best value per column. 

21