Title: AIPC: Agent-Based Automation for AI Model Deployment with Qualcomm AI Runtime

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.14661v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 00:34:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# AIPC: Agent-Based Automation for AI Model Deployment with Qualcomm AI Runtime 

# Jianhao Su, Zhanwei Wu, ShengTing Huang, Weidong Feng Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. April 2026 

Abstract Edge AI model deployment is a multi-stage engineering process involving model conversion, operator compatibility handling, quantization calibration, runtime integration, and accuracy validation. In prac-tice, this workflow is long, failure-prone, and heavily dependent on deployment expertise, particularly when targeting hardware-specific inference runtimes. This technical report presents AIPC (AI Porting Conversion), an AI agent-driven approach for constrained automation of AI model deployment. AIPC decomposes deployment into standardized, verifiable stages and injects deployment-domain knowledge into agent execution through Agent Skills, helper scripts, and a stage-wise validation loop. This design reduces both the expertise barrier and the engineering time required for hardware deployment. Using Qualcomm AI Runtime (QAIRT) as the primary scenario, this report examines automated deployment across representative vision, multimodal, and speech models. In the cases covered here, AIPC can complete deployment from PyTorch to runnable QNN/SNPE inference within 7-20 minutes for structurally regular vision models, with indicative API costs roughly in the range of USD 0.7-10. For more complex models involving less-supported operators, dynamic shapes, or autoregressive decoding structures, fully automated deployment may still require further advances, but AIPC already provides practical support for execution, failure localization, and bounded repair. 

Keywords: AI model deployment; edge AI; QAIRT; large language model agent; automated software engi-neering; model conversion Open-source repository: https://github.com/quic/ai-engine-direct-helper/tree/main/tools/skills/qai-runner-skill 

# 1 Introduction 

# 1.1 Background 

As edge AI applications expand from image classification to object detection, speech recognition, multimodal understanding, and generative tasks, model deployment is no longer a secondary step after training. It has become a key engineering stage that often determines whether a system can be delivered in practice, especially in scenarios requiring low latency, privacy preservation, and offline availability. However, a substantial gap remains between research-oriented model code and reliable execution on edge runtimes. In practice, deployment involves far more than model export: it often requires ONNX conversion, operator replacement, dynamic-shape resolution, graph repair, runtime integration, preprocessing and post-processing adaptation, accuracy validation, and hardware-specific compilation. For a hardware-optimized runtime such as Qualcomm AI Runtime (QAIRT), developers must understand not only the model itself, but also toolchain behavior, operator-support boundaries, layout constraints, and platform-specific differences. Consequently, deployment remains a knowledge-intensive and experience-dependent task. 1

> arXiv:2604.14661v1 [cs.SE] 16 Apr 2026

# 1.2 Research Question 

Large language models (LLMs) have already shown strong capabilities in code generation, automated repair, task orchestration, and tool usage. Based on this trend, this paper studies the following question: Given an existing deployment toolchain and validation workflow, can an LLM agent effectively take over repetitive engineering work in AI model deployment, and perform bounded automatic repair when conversion fails or runtime exceptions occur? The key issue is not whether “an LLM knows every hardware detail,” but rather whether, when domain knowledge is explicitly provided through Agent Skills, helper functions, and validation rules, the LLM can act as a task orchestrator and executor that turns a complex deployment process into a repeatable, verifiable, and continuously improvable automated workflow. 

# 1.3 Contributions 

The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 1. Agentizing the AI deployment workflow: We reorganize existing deployment workflows into a form executable by AI agents. Through Agent Skills, a validation loop, and failure-recovery mechanisms, a deployment pipeline that traditionally depends on human experience is transformed into a repeatable and verifiable automated workflow, with complete end-to-end QAIRT-based cases presented in this paper. 2. Introducing the “Skills + validation loop” design pattern: Toolchain knowledge is encapsulated through Agent Skills and combined with golden outputs, interface checks, and consistency comparisons to constrain agent behavior within a verifiable space. 3. Providing a repair-level view of deployment-oriented model surgery: We organize deployment repair actions across the PyTorch source level, ONNX graph level, and runtime interface level, enabling compatibility fixes to be incorporated into an automated workflow. 4. Conducting representative multi-model, multi-agent case analysis: Across models of varying struc-tural complexity and several mainstream AI agents, we summarize success boundaries for automation, manual intervention patterns, and differences in agent behavior. 5. Deriving engineering practice lessons: We extract a set of design principles suitable for edge AI deploy-ment automation and provide guidance for future extension to other inference frameworks. 

# 1.4 Positioning as a Technical Report 

This paper is written as a technical report. It focuses on system design, engineering workflow, case observa-tions, and methodological lessons, rather than emphasizing large-scale statistically significant experiments under strictly controlled conditions. The goal is to report engineering evidence and reusable workflow de-sign, rather than to claim benchmark superiority under universally controlled conditions. The experimental results are primarily used to support the following claims: (1) AIPC is engineering-feasible as a workflow framework; (2) different model categories exhibit structurally different difficulties in automated deployment; (3) the value of LLM agents in deployment tasks is better understood as that of a “constrained automation executor” rather than a fully autonomous end-to-end solver. 

# 1.5 Paper Organization 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 introduces the QAIRT background and deployment challenges. Section 4 presents the AIPC method design. Section 5 describes the evaluation targets and procedure. Section 6 reports case results and observations. Section 7 summarizes engineering lessons and limitations. Section 8 discusses future directions. Section 9 concludes the paper. 21.6 Open-Source Release 

The workflow and supporting materials described in this paper have been released in open-source form as part of the QAI AppBuilder toolchain since March 10, 2026. This release is intended to provide users with a practical starting point for constrained, verifiable AI deployment automation under QAIRT-centered workflows, including Agent Skills, helper scripts, and related references. The goal of the release is not to present a fully autonomous universal deployment system, but to make the AIPC method reusable, inspectable, and continuously improvable through open engineering practice. 

# 2 Related Work 

# 2.1 AI Model Deployment and Inference Frameworks 

Current mainstream AI deployment frameworks can be roughly divided into several categories. Cross-platform inference frameworks: LiteRT (formerly TensorFlow Lite), ONNX Runtime, and MNN em-phasize unified model representation and multi-platform adaptability. These frameworks offer good porta-bility for general inference, but deep optimization for specific hardware accelerators often still requires extra engineering effort, and they typically do not provide automated orchestration for the deployment workflow itself. Hardware-specific inference frameworks: NVIDIA TensorRT [1], Intel OpenVINO [2], Qualcomm QAIRT [8], and Rockchip RKNPU [3] usually provide higher performance and lower latency on specific hardware, but also introduce stricter operator-support boundaries, data-layout constraints, and toolchain dependencies. Their deployment workflows depend heavily on engineers’ understanding of platform details and generally lack systematic automation support. Compiler-driven inference frameworks and intermediate-representation infrastructure: Apache TVM [22] is an end-to-end deep learning compiler framework for multiple hardware backends. Through a unified computational graph representation and auto-tuning mechanisms (AutoTVM/Ansor), it compiles models into executable code optimized for target hardware and offers strong cross-platform generalization. MLIR (Multi-Level Intermediate Representation) [23], proposed by the LLVM community, is a general compiler infrastructure that provides a unified framework for IR transformations at different levels, and it has been widely used to build ML compiler backends such as TensorFlow XLA and IREE. The advantage of such frameworks is that they turn hardware adaptation into the composition and optimization of compiler passes, giving them strong extensibility. However, their deployment workflows still require engineers to understand compiler abstraction layers and target hardware characteristics in depth, and tuning for specific hardware often needs either extensive manual configuration or costly automated search. Overall, existing systems focus more on “how to convert models better” than on “how to systematize deploy-ment itself into an automated workflow executable by agents.” 

# 2.2 LLM-Assisted Software Engineering and Agentic Execution 

In recent years, tools such as GitHub Copilot [5], Claude Code [4, 6], Cursor [7], OpenCode [18], Cline [19], and Codex CLI [20] have promoted agentic use of LLMs in software engineering. Through tool interfaces for file operations, command execution, and context awareness, these systems extend LLMs from pure text generators into “software agents” capable of executing tasks. However, progress on general programming tasks does not imply direct transferability to AI deployment. Deployment tasks have the following characteristics: • They depend on extensive domain-specific toolchain knowledge. • Correctness must be determined by runtime result validation, not surface-level code appearance. • Failures often arise from interactions among environment, framework, operator, and platform con-straints. • Many repairs require repeated localization across PyTorch [10], ONNX [9], and runtime interfaces. 3Therefore, if domain knowledge is not injected into the agent context in a structured form, and one relies only on the generic prior knowledge of an LLM, common failures include hallucinated APIs, incorrect choice of repair layer, and incorrect environment diagnosis. 

# 2.3 How This Work Differs 

Compared with existing deployment tools or LLM coding assistants, AIPC is distinguished not by a new low-level compiler, but by an upper-layer workflow design for deployment automation. Its main differences are: • Explicit knowledge injection: Platform knowledge is turned into reusable execution templates through Agent Skills and reference documents. • Stage-wise verification: Each stage is tied to observable inputs and outputs whenever possible, pre-venting the agent from drifting in unverifiable states. • Failure recoverability: Model surgery, retries, and human correction are integrated into the workflow, rather than treating failure as the end of the process. • Engineering reusability: The method emphasizes cross-model reuse, error accumulation, and potential for extension to other deployment tasks. 

# 3 Background: Common Challenges in Hardware-Specific Inference Deploy-ment - QAIRT as an Example 

# 3.1 Overview of the QAIRT Deployment Pipeline 

Qualcomm AI Runtime (QAIRT) is the official AI inference SDK for Qualcomm hardware platforms, covering the full range of inference scenarios from lightweight vision models to generative large models. The main forms involved in this paper include: • SNPE (Snapdragon Neural Processing Engine): A higher-level runtime framework that uses the DLC (Deep Learning Container) format. It provides good cross-backend execution capability and is suitable for rapid integration and prototyping. • QNN (Qualcomm Neural Network): A framework closer to the hardware execution layer. It typically achieves high-performance deployment by generating platform-specific libraries and Context Binaries, and is the preferred path for production. • Genie (Generative AI Inference Extension): An inference extension optimized for generative AI work-loads. It provides efficient inference support on Qualcomm NPUs for large language models, multimodal models, and related tasks. QAI AppBuilder provides a higher-level interface on top of QAIRT, allowing developers to integrate model inference quickly in Python and C++, and also offering OpenAI API-compatible interfaces for large-model applications. In the typical scenario considered in this paper, the deployment pipeline can be summarized as: PyTorch -> ONNX -> QAIRT (SNPE or QNN) -> Context Binary -> Runtime Inference This pipeline involves not only model format conversion, but also interface alignment, runtime adaptation, and accuracy checking. 

# 3.2 Typical Deployment Steps 

• Exporting PyTorch to ONNX: Use methods such as torch.onnx.export() in PyTorch [10] to export a model to ONNX [9]. This stage must handle dynamic axes, input-output definitions, export versions, and differences in operator semantics. • Converting ONNX to QAIRT: Call qnn-onnx-converter or related tools to generate an intermediate representation consumable by QNN/SNPE. Common issues at this stage include unsupported operators, layout rewrites, shape-inference failures, and tool errors. 4• Context compilation (AOT): Use Ahead-of-Time (AOT) compilation to generate a Context Binary for a specific target platform. Compared with runtime Just-in-Time (JIT) compilation, AOT signifi-cantly reduces model loading and initialization overhead and performs hardware-specific optimization in advance, improving edge-side execution efficiency. • Quantization and calibration: In performance-sensitive scenarios, further FP16, W8A16, or W8A8 quantization may be applied. This step depends heavily on representative calibration data and a stable preprocessing pipeline. • Runtime integration and validation: Load the model through the application-layer interface, run sample inputs, and compare outputs with the reference baseline to confirm that the converted result is usable. 

# 3.3 Analysis of Deployment Difficulties 

3.3.1 Operator support boundaries QAIRT supports only a subset of ONNX operators. When unsupported operators appear in a model, developers often need to perform equivalent replacement or graph rewriting before deployment can proceed. 3.3.2 Data layout changes Conversion tools may automatically change tensor layouts during intermediate stages, causing original pre-processing and postprocessing logic to fail. 3.3.3 Dynamic-shape and fixed-shape conflicts Many research models naturally include dynamic input lengths, dynamic batch sizes, or dynamic sequence structures, while edge inference frameworks generally prefer fixed-shape compilation paths. 3.3.4 Quantization depends on data and workflow stability Quantization is not a step that can be completed simply by issuing a command. If calibration data deviates from the true input distribution, or if preprocessing logic is inconsistent with the actual inference pipeline, quantization results may suffer severe accuracy degradation. 3.3.5 Platform and environment complexity In environments involving Windows on ARM, x86 emulation, and multiple coexisting toolchains, an agent may misjudge the architecture, invoke the wrong library version, or misunderstand the context of a tool error. These issues are not caused by the model itself, but by complex interactions at the deployment-environment level. 

# 4 The AIPC Method 

# 4.1 Overall Design Philosophy 

AIPC (AI Porting Conversion) is not a single script or point tool, but an automation organization method for deployment tasks. Although its methodology has a degree of generality, the system implementation, step design, and experimental validation in this paper are all centered on QAIRT. Its core ideas are: • Break a complex deployment pipeline into several verifiable stages. • Solidify hardware deployment knowledge into reusable Agent Skills and reference templates. • Let AI agents perform code generation, command invocation, error localization, and local repair inside a constrained workflow. • Accumulate automation failures into reusable knowledge for future tasks. In other words, the point of AIPC is not to “let the agent improvise freely,” but to “let the agent work inside an engineered space.” 54.2 Workflow Decomposition 

AIPC divides the deployment process into six major steps, as shown in Figure 1. 

[Figure 1: Conceptual Diagram of the AIPC Workflow] PyTorch Model |v(1) Model preparation and baseline establishment |v(2) ONNX conversion and interface validation |v(3) QAIRT model build |v(4) Inference execution and accuracy alignment |v(5) Quantization and optimization (optional) |v(6) Performance analysis and deployment report 

# 4.3 Step 1: Model Preparation and Baseline Establishment 

The goal of this step is to confirm that the original PyTorch model runs correctly in the current environment, and to establish the “golden reference” used for subsequent validation. Concretely, the agent needs to load the model and required weights, determine the input specification, data types, and preprocessing logic, use sample inputs to generate reference outputs, and save key intermediate results, input-output shapes, and baseline data. The significance of this stage is that every later conversion, repair, or quantization step must return to this baseline to determine whether the result is still trustworthy. 

# 4.4 Step 2: ONNX Conversion and Modular Inference Pipeline 

At this stage, the agent typically needs to automatically generate an ONNX export script and set the correct inputs, outputs, opset, and dynamic axes. It also needs to split the original inference flow into three independent modules: preprocessing, model inference, and postprocessing. In addition, it must write ONNX inference test code and numerically compare ONNX outputs with the PyTorch baseline. The core value of this modularization is that it decouples preprocessing and postprocessing from the model body, making problem localization in later conversion stages more precise while also providing a standardized interface for large-scale generation of quantization calibration data. 4.4.1 Model Surgery AIPC treats model surgery as a core capability in deployment automation rather than as an exceptional case. Model surgery refers to deployment-oriented rewriting of model structure under the premise of preserving functional equivalence or approximate equivalence. The surgeries involved in this paper include: • Converting dynamic shapes to fixed shapes. • Replacing unsupported operators with equivalent operator compositions. 6Model surgery is triggered by specific failure events in the deployment pipeline, corresponding to three intervention levels: • When ONNX export fails: modify module implementations at the PyTorch source level to eliminate operator or shape incompatibilities during export. • When QAIRT conversion fails: patch nodes and attributes at the ONNX graph level so that the conversion tool can process the model correctly. • When QAIRT runtime fails (including Context Binary compilation failure or inference execution ex-ceptions): apply further compatibility fixes based on the actual error, and, if necessary, fall back to an earlier stage for repair. 

# 4.5 Step 3: QAIRT Model Build 

After the ONNX model passes validation, AIPC further converts it into the QAIRT target format. The following strategies are especially important at this stage: 4.5.1 Interface Preservation To reduce interface inconsistency caused by layout drift, AIPC prefers conservative strategies such as 

--preserve_io to keep model inputs and outputs aligned with the ONNX side. For example: 

qnn-onnx-converter --input_network model.onnx \ --output_path model.cpp \ --preserve_io 

In addition, --preserve_io preserves the input and output ordering of the ONNX model as-is, avoiding application-layer interface mismatches caused by internal tensor reordering in the conversion tool. Although this strategy may reduce performance in some cases, prioritizing interface stability is usually more beneficial for successfully completing the full automated pipeline. However, --preserve_io can be problematic in some quantization pipelines: on certain SoC configurations it may implicitly preserve FP I/O or trigger FP16-related constraints, which can surface as platform errors (e.g., SocModel FP16 not supported) during quantized model conversion or subsequent compilation. In such cases, a practical workaround is to avoid the QNN quantization path and use the SNPE DLC quantization flow instead, or adjust conversion options to not preserve FP I/O depending on the target/runtime requirements. 4.5.2 Precision Configuration and Target Hardware Adaptation For models suitable for NPU execution, AIPC tends to prioritize FP16 precision mode at this stage because it is easier to validate for accuracy and does not require calibration data. Some hardware platforms may not natively support FP16 execution and may instead rely mainly on INT8 or other quantized paths. In such cases, the corresponding deployment artifacts are better handled in the later quantization stage, rather than introducing quantization-related uncertainty during early validation. 4.5.3 Automatic Context Binary Generation For the target platform, the agent further triggers Context Binary compilation to produce an execution artifact closer to the final deployable form. 4.5.4 Failure Recovery If unsupported operators, shape issues, or toolchain exceptions appear during conversion, the agent selects repairs at either the PyTorch level or the ONNX level according to Skill rules and reruns the conversion, instead of directly terminating the process. 74.6 Step 4: Inference Execution and Accuracy Alignment 

To reduce the complexity of integrating QAIRT inference for the agent, AIPC primarily uses an AIPC loader approach so that an existing ONNX inference script can be executed with the QAIRT backend without modifying the original ONNX-side program: 

# Launch the inference script through the AIPC hot-patch loader, # which redirects the ONNX Runtime import to onnxwrapper. 

python aipc inference.py 

For users who prefer explicit control, the same backend redirection can also be written directly in code through the wrapper interface: 

# ONNX inference 

import onnxruntime as ort session = ort.InferenceSession("model.onnx") 

# Explicit wrapper-based redirection to the QAIRT backend 

import onnxwrapper as ort session = ort.InferenceSession("model.onnx", backend="QAIRT") 

This design offers three benefits. First, it reduces API hallucination, because the agent does not need to learn an entirely unfamiliar inference interface. Second, it facilitates alignment verification, since the same script can run under different backends. Third, it limits the scope of changes, keeping fault localization focused on differences between the model and the runtime rather than on application-layer rewrites. At this stage, AIPC typically verifies: - Whether inference completes successfully. - Whether output shapes and data types match expectations. - Whether errors relative to the ONNX or PyTorch baseline remain within an acceptable range. - Whether preprocessing and postprocessing still work correctly. 

# 4.7 Step 5: Quantization and Optimization 

Only after the previous stages are stable does AIPC enter the quantization stage. Its automation logic mainly relies on the fact that the preprocessing module has already been standardized, enabling the agent to generate calibration samples in batches and drive the quantization toolchain. In current practice, quantization mainly targets W8A16 and W8A8/INT8 configurations. The core value of AIPC in this stage is not merely issuing a quantization command, but organizing “calibra-tion data generation -> quantization -> result validation” into a repeatable process. In the future, it can be further integrated with toolsets such as AIMET to extend toward pruning and structured compression. 

# 4.8 Step 6: Performance Analysis 

Once the model runs stably, AIPC can continue by invoking tools such as qnn-net-run and snpe-net-run to collect per-layer performance data and generate deployment analysis materials. The implementation of this reporting stage is still evolving and has not yet been finalized, but it already provides a basis for subsequent performance optimization and experience reuse. 

# 4.9 The Abstracting Role of Agent Skills 

One key design of AIPC is to externalize deployment knowledge as Agent Skills. These Skills do not replace the underlying SDK. Instead, they provide recommended steps and execution order for the agent, explicitly constrain which repair level should be addressed first, and supply common failure patterns and suggested repair paths, thereby reducing strategic drift in long deployment chains. Therefore, AIPC’s automation capability comes largely from the combination of “structured knowledge + tool capability + validation loop,” rather than from relying only on a stronger base model. 84.10 A Generalized Preprocessing View Across Multiple Backends 

Dynamic-shape fixing and operator replacement do not serve QAIRT alone; they can also be viewed as model preprocessing steps before entering other hardware-specific inference frameworks. Therefore, the representation-layer parts of AIPC have some potential for cross-backend migration. Although this paper remains implementation-focused on QAIRT, its front-end workflow and methodological abstraction can in principle be extended to other deployment targets such as TVM. 

# 5 Experimental Design 

# 5.1 Evaluation Goals 

The experiments in this paper do not aim to build a large standardized benchmark. Instead, they evaluate the following questions through case studies: 1. Can AIPC complete end-to-end deployment on representative models? 2. What are the primary automation barriers for models of different complexity? 3. How do different AI agents behave differently inside the same workflow? 4. Which deployment steps benefit most from automation, and which still require human leadership? 

# 5.2 Test Models 

The following models are analyzed in this paper: - ESRGAN [12] (image super-resolution): mainly convo-lutional, with a relatively regular graph structure and few deployment obstacles, making it suitable as a baseline case for automated workflow validation. - YOLOv8 [11] (object detection): mature structure and strong ecosystem support. Its main deployment challenge lies in decoupling postprocessing logic such as NMS and coordinate scaling. - LPRNet [15] (license plate recognition): a lightweight convolutional network whose main challenge is export-stage compatibility around the MaxPool3d operator, requiring structural re-placement before successful conversion. - YOLO-World [16] (open-vocabulary object detection): combines visual detection with text features. Deployment challenges focus on replacing the Einsum operator, handling multimodal interfaces, and aligning postprocessing logic. - YOLO26 [21] (next-generation object detection): uses a newer network architecture whose toolchain compatibility is still evolving. The main challenge lies in compatibility adaptation between the exported graph and the QAIRT toolchain. - Whisper [13] (speech recognition): uses a Transformer encoder-decoder structure. Its main deployment difficulty lies in the in-herent conflict between dynamic sequence lengths, autoregressive token-by-token decoding, and the NPU preference for fixed-shape batch computation. - DeepSeek-R1 [14] (extended observation): a large language model that raises stronger demands in model size, dynamic decoding, operator support, and resource con-straints. It is not included in the full quantitative comparison in this paper, but is discussed as an extended future direction. In the latest toolkit version, operator patching is supported by an operator-patching database, making many cases easier to resolve. To reproduce the original issue, the operator-patching database should be removed. 

# 5.3 Evaluated Agents 

This paper observes several mainstream AI agent/model combinations. Among them, the following three agent categories completed the full evaluation workflow including inference validation, and their results are included in the quantitative analysis in Section 6. Due to test-environment resource constraints, this phase prioritized freely available services. All model information reflects the status checked on March 30, 2026. Model Name Context Window Evaluation Platform Qwen 3.5 Coder 32K tokens Qwen CLI MiniMax 2.5 [17] 245K tokens OpenCode MiMo-V2-Pro 1M tokens OpenCode 9The following agents participated in selected stages of the deployment workflow. Due to test-environment constraints, full end-to-end evaluation was not completed for this group; only partial results are reported. Model Name Context Window Evaluation Platform GPT-5.3 Codex 128K tokens Codex CLI Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview 1M tokens Cline (VS Code) Gemini 3.1 Flash Preview 1M tokens Cline (VS Code) Claude Sonnet 4.6 200K tokens Cline (VS Code) All agents in this group were run in auto-approve (continuous execution) mode, allowing uninterrupted workflow progression without per-step confirmation. For agents executed via Cline (VS Code), API cost estimates were read directly from Cline’s built-in cost display in the GUI. It should be emphasized that the goal of this paper is not to produce a strict ranking of general LLM agent capability, but to observe how different agents differ in Skill adherence, recovery ability, and task-completion stability within the same deployment workflow. 

# 5.4 Evaluation Metrics 

Since this paper is positioned as an engineering technical report, we adopt metrics closer to deployment practice: • Number of manual interventions: the number of points where human correction is required. • End-to-end time: approximate time from model preparation to successful validation of runnable output. • Failure-mode types: such as unsupported operators, path errors, environment misjudgment, workflow drift, and abnormal inference results. Notes on the experimental data: Each row in the tables corresponds to one independent run from scratch and records the actual result of that run, rather than a statistical average over repeated trials. The manual-intervention count records the number of times the agent explicitly reported completion or failure and requested human confirmation, or proactively requested human decision-making at key points. End-to-end time is measured as the actual wall-clock time of the full run, excluding model-weight download time but including agent thinking, code generation, and command-execution wait time. Because this stage relied mainly on free services, API-call cost is reported as an empirical token-based estimate for reference only; actual costs may vary with model version updates and error conditions. 

# 5.5 Experimental Environment 

Hardware platform - Development workstation: Qualcomm Snapdragon X Elite2 (Windows 11) - Target device: Qualcomm Snapdragon X Elite2 (Windows 11) In the primary experiments in this paper, the development workstation and target inference device are the same machine, both running on the Snapdragon X Elite platform. This setup means that model conversion and inference validation are completed in the same hardware environment, eliminating the remote deployment step found in real cross-compilation scenarios, but also making the performance data closer to “local inference” rather than “remote target-device inference.” A second environment was also used for a limited set of tests, representing a more realistic cross-compilation scenario: • Development workstation: x86-64 Linux (Ubuntu 24.04) • Target device: Qualcomm RB8 development board (Ubuntu 24.04, ARM) In this configuration, model conversion and ONNX-to-QAIRT build steps are performed on the x86-64 host, while inference execution and validation are carried out on the ARM target device. The agent is responsible for the full workflow including artifact transfer, remote environment setup, and on-device inference via 10 SSH. This setup more closely reflects real-world edge deployment practice. Due to environment availability constraints, only a subset of models and agents were evaluated in this configuration; results are reported separately where applicable. Context Binary generation is optional and may be skipped in this configuration. Software stack - QAIRT SDK: 2.42 - QAI AppBuilder: 2.0 No additional specialized plugins were installed for the agents during evaluation, in order to keep the envi-ronment as consistent as possible. 

# 5.6 Execution Procedure 

This paper uses a natural-language-prompt-driven, agent-executed, human-observed evaluation method. A typical procedure includes the following five phases: • Environment setup and baseline establishment: Use the prompt create example of [model] to guide the agent to generate a runnable model example, and have a human confirm that baseline PyTorch inference works correctly. • Create AIPC project: Run create aipc project inside the model directory, letting the agent auto-matically create the project structure and generate the default configuration template. • Configuration confirmation: Use show project configs to inspect and confirm the current project configuration. • Automated execution and manual intervention: Use do all work for the plan to start the full deployment workflow; the developer observes execution and records intervention points if the workflow is interrupted or abnormal. • Deployment report generation: After completion, record the deployment analysis report generated by the agent, including conversion results, accuracy alignment, and key steps. The experiments in this paper mainly use QNN FP16 mode. The quantization stage requires appropriate calibration data and is not yet included in the complete evaluation range. 

# 6 Results and Case Analysis 

This section analyzes the experimental results mainly through case-based comparative observation. First, deployment behavior is examined model by model from lower to higher complexity. Second, the AI agents involved in the evaluation are compared laterally, with emphasis on workflow adherence, failure recovery, and execution stability within the AIPC workflow rather than on ranking model capability. The tables in this section are intended to present representative case records and failure-mode observations, and should not be interpreted as agent rankings under strictly controlled conditions. 

# 6.1 Analysis by Deployment Model 

This subsection presents representative case analysis in order of increasing model complexity. Because the number of test runs differs across models and agents, the focus is on representative behavior patterns rather than direct horizontal comparison of single numbers. Across the evaluated models, the main automation bottlenecks can be broadly grouped into three categories: application-level pipeline decoupling issues in otherwise regular vision models, operator-compatibility and graph-rewrite issues in newer or multimodal architectures, and structural mismatch between autoregressive decoding patterns and NPU-oriented fixed-shape deployment assumptions. 6.1.1 ESRGAN: High Automation Feasibility on a Standard Convolutional Model ESRGAN is one of the most stable models for automation in this study. Its network structure is regular, its operator ecosystem is mature, and its postprocessing is relatively simple, so AIPC can usually complete the full ONNX-to-QNN workflow smoothly across most agents. The main caveat is fixed input-shape configura-tion: if export parameters do not match the test image size, inference may still run, but the results become obviously incorrect. Once this constraint is explicitly stated, the agent can usually correct it on its own. 11 Agent Backend Time Manual Interventions Notes MiMo-V2-Pro QNN 9 min 0Note: Full workflow completed smoothly. Qwen 3.5 Coder QNN 14 min 0Note: Full workflow completed smoothly. MiniMax 2.5 QNN 7 min 1Note: The report was not generated; human retriggering was required. Remote inference on Linux (x86-64 host → ARM target, via SSH) Agent Backend Time Manual Interventions Notes GPT-5.3 Codex QNN 13 min 0Note: Completed successfully. Claude Sonnet 4.6 QNN 14 min 0Note: Estimated API cost: USD 2.2. Gemini 3.1 Flash Preview QNN 20 min 3Note: Failed to switch to remote execution; additional errors occurred. Estimated API cost: USD 5. This result suggests that, for models with regular structure and clear interfaces, AIPC provides practical value within the current test range and can handle much of the repetitive deployment work. One case also illustrates a cost-amplification risk: when an initial error is not properly recovered, subsequent cascading failures can significantly inflate API costs — in the observed instance, a single unresolved deviation led to a chain of downstream errors that drove the total cost to approximately USD 5, roughly 2–7× higher than successful runs on the same model. 6.1.2 YOLOv8: Postprocessing Decoupling Is Critical to Automation Success The main difficulty of YOLOv8 is not the backbone network itself, but the fact that the official inference pipeline mixes in substantial postprocessing logic, especially NMS and coordinate mapping. If the agent treats the original flow as one monolithic unit, exported inference often produces shifted bounding boxes or incorrect ROIs. AIPC’s modular design allows the agent to focus on repairing the postprocessing part while preserving the stability of the main model. Two additional evaluation settings were observed for YOLOv8 in order to understand workflow robustness across environments. Early toolkit version without the operator-patching database (Windows on ARM) Agent Backend Time Manual Interventions Notes Qwen 3.5 Coder QNN 15 min 0Note: Completed successfully. Qwen 3.5 Coder SNPE 6 min 0Note: Completed successfully. MiMo-V2-Pro QNN 16 min 0Note: Completed successfully. MiniMax 2.5 QNN 18 min 2Note: Misjudged hardware warnings and referenced the wrong SDK version. MiniMax 2.5 QNN 12 min 0Note: Completed successfully after rerun. 12 Remote inference on Linux (x86-64 host → ARM target, via SSH) Agent Backend Time Manual Interventions Notes GPT-5.3 Codex QNN 8 min 0Note: Completed successfully. Gemini 3.1 Flash Preview QNN 10 min 0Note: Estimated API cost: USD 0.46. Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview QNN 20 min 1Note: One additional intervention was required to verify ROI detection results. Estimated API cost: USD 5.5. Claude Sonnet 4.6 QNN 13 min 0Note: Estimated API cost: USD 2.53. This case indicates that the key to deployment automation is not just improving export success rate, but ensuring that application-layer logic in the inference pipeline can be explicitly decomposed and validated step by step. 6.1.3 LPRNet: The Value of Operator-Replacement Templates The typical obstacle in LPRNet is failure to export MaxPool3d .Agent Backend Time Manual Interventions Notes Qwen 3.5 Coder QNN 9 min 0Note: Completed successfully. MiniMax 2.5 QNN 18 min -Note: The first run did not complete because the workflow was interrupted. MiniMax 2.5 QNN 8 min 0Note: The second run completed successfully after correction. MiMo-V2-Pro QNN 20 min 0Note: Completed successfully. This result indicates that summarizing common compatibility issues into reusable repair patterns is a key way to improve stability in automated deployment. 6.1.4 YOLO26: Friction Between New Architectures and Evolving Toolchains The YOLO26 evaluation focuses on AIPC’s adaptability to newer model structures. ONNX export of this model succeeds smoothly, and the QNN conversion stage can also generate intermediate artifacts, but Context Binary compilation may still encounter unsupported operators, requiring operator patching or fallback to the SNPE DLC path to complete deployment. In this case, the typical problematic operator is Mod . Mod(a, b) is equivalent to a % b , and in theory can be expanded into a - b * floor(a / b) . However, floor is also unsupported during QNN conversion, so the entire expression must be further rewritten as a pure basic-operator composition of Div + Mul + Sub 

before conversion succeeds. This two-level replacement chain is the stage where differences in agent behavior are most obvious. 13 Agent Backend Time Manual Interventions Notes MiMo-V2-Pro QNN 12 min 0Note: Completed successfully. Qwen 3.5 Coder QNN 120 min 1Note: The first run failed; completion required human guidance and repair. Qwen 3.5 Coder QNN 25 min 1Note: It repeatedly switched to SNPE automatically and did not complete under QNN without human guidance. Qwen 3.5 Coder QNN 53 min 3Note: It completed with SNPE first, and then completed under the intended flow after AIPC Skill use was enforced and MiniMax’s operator-replacement strategy was referenced. MiniMax 2.5 QNN 29 min 1Note: It misjudged the ARM64/x86_64 emulation relationship. The YOLO26 results suggest that human intervention is still needed in some cases to match expected deployment goals. 6.1.5 YOLO-World: Structural Bottlenecks in Complex Multimodal Models YOLO-World combines the postprocessing complexity of detection with cross-modal operator issues in open-vocabulary models. Einsum is the most typical incompatible operator in this model and must be replaced before export. In addition, path management, text-embedding preprocessing, and result interpretation further increase the chance of agent error. Agent Backend Time Manual Interventions Notes MiMo-V2-Pro QNN 25 min 0Note: Completed successfully. Qwen 3.5 Coder QNN 32 min 1Note: A path error caused temporary drift toward an incorrect alternative approach. MiniMax 2.5 QNN 113 min 0Note: The long runtime was likely affected by workflow drift. This case shows that once model structure goes beyond a single-modal convolutional network, the main pressure on automation is no longer just operator support, but maintaining strategy stability when multiple classes of problems appear at once. 6.1.6 Whisper: Deep Conflict Between Model Structure and Hardware Execution Mode Whisper’s encoder-decoder structure is far more complex than that of convolutional models. The natural conflict between autoregressive token-by-token decoding with dynamic sequence length and the NPU prefer-ence for fixed-shape batch computation means that Whisper deployment is not merely a question of operator support from the beginning. In current tests, the encoder can be migrated to NPU execution, but the decoder often falls back to CPU execution because of dynamic shapes and autoregressive dependencies. This is not a satisfactory outcome, but it reveals the core issue: there is a structural mismatch between the decoder’s execution style and the NPU’s compilation assumptions. Preliminary exploration suggests that if the decoder is manually statically reshaped at the PyTorch level and the KV Cache interface is exposed explicitly, the decoder may also be brought onto the NPU conversion path, enabling more complete NPU execution coverage. This direction is still in an early exploratory stage, and the experimental results have not yet been systematically organized, but tests with MiMo-V2-Pro have already shown some feasibility. 14 This case also points to a future expansion boundary for AIPC. At present, AIPC’s model surgery mainly focuses on operator-compatibility repair. For models such as Whisper, however, the real bottleneck lies in model-structure transformation for NPU execution patterns, including static reshaping, explicit KV Cache exposure, and decoding-loop refactoring. These changes go beyond simple operator replacement and require the agent to have a deeper understanding of model execution semantics and proactive restructuring for target hardware. Systematically incorporating this kind of “NPU-oriented model redesign” into the AIPC workflow is an important future research direction. 6.1.7 DeepSeek-R1 and Larger Models: Extended Directions Large language models such as DeepSeek-R1 impose stronger requirements in parameter scale, dynamic decoding, KV cache handling, and operator coverage. At this stage, AIPC can provide workflow structure and limited local automation for such models, but cannot yet complete deployment reliably without significant human participation. Notably, compared with the accuracy-alignment challenges seen in Whisper, large language models may be relatively easier in precision handling. This direction will be explored further in future work. 

# 6.2 AI Agent Behavior Analysis 

Based on multiple rounds of case observation, the behavior of the evaluated agents within the AIPC workflow can be qualitatively summarized as follows, with emphasis on workflow adherence, failure recovery, and execution stability: • Qwen 3.5 Coder: Overall stable in standard workflows and usually able to follow Skill constraints step by step. • MiniMax 2.5: Improved relative to earlier versions, but in some cases still more prone to workflow drift, misinterpreting hardware warnings, or bypassing Skills to directly invoke low-level commands, increasing runtime and result variance. • MiMo-V2-Pro: Showed smooth execution in multiple cases, relatively high adherence to Skill con-straints, and zero-manual-intervention completion on several structurally regular models. From these case observations, differences in adherence to Skill constraints appear to matter more for deployment-task quality than differences in generic coding ability. This supports an important conclusion: in deployment tasks, an agent’s ability to follow the workflow is as important as its platform knowledge. A medium-capability agent that follows process strictly is often more suitable for engineering automation than a stronger but frequently drifting one. In addition, GPT-5.3 (Codex CLI), Claude Sonnet 4.6, and Gemini 3.1 Flash / Pro have so far only been observed through the cross-compilation stage because of environment limitations. Their overall usage flow was smooth and usable, and complete end-to-end inference validation will be added when conditions permit. This paper also explored using lighter locally deployable models such as gpt-oss-120b, Qwen-Next-80b, and Gemma 4 as the agent-driving layer. However, under the current environment, none of these models could stably complete functional verification within the AIPC workflow, and they often experienced workflow interruptions. We believe local small models as agents have potential value in privacy protection and lower call cost, but their instruction-following ability and tool-use stability in complex deployment tasks still require further study and optimization. 6.2.1 Typical Failure Modes Based on repeated case observations, this paper identifies several recurring failure modes in agent execution. Importantly, these failures are not caused by agents lacking the ability to solve operator-compatibility prob-lems. In fact, with enough attempts, most agents can eventually find valid replacement or repair strategies. The real issue is that missing workflow constraints, execution-path deviation, or environment misjudgment prevent that capability from being applied in the right direction. 15 • Ignoring Skill constraints and falling into repeated trial and error: Some agents, when facing conversion failure, did not follow the repair path defined by the Skill and instead tried many alternatives on their own. Although the agent itself was capable of finding a correct solution, each attempt lacked a clear validation exit, errors accumulated, and the agent eventually stopped after exhausting retries instead of returning to the correct repair level and restarting. The essence of this mode is not “cannot do it,” but “was not guided in the right direction.” • Applying operator patches by writing ONNX files to disk and then giving up: AIPC requires operator patches to be done through in-memory graph manipulation to preserve reproducibility and traceability. However, some agents chose to write modified ONNX files directly back to disk and use them as inputs to later steps, causing the patch logic to become decoupled from the original model and making intermediate states hard to reproduce. Worse, when this approach encountered later conversion failures, the agent often could not localize the root cause and eventually gave up instead of continuing to repair. The root problem is noncompliance with the AIPC operation convention, not lack of technical ability for operator replacement. • Misjudging runtime platform architecture: Under Windows on ARM, some agents incorrectly judged the current environment as x86_64 and therefore invoked the wrong toolchain libraries or generated build artifacts mismatched to the target architecture. This is a form of “silent failure”: the agent does not fail immediately, and the problem only appears later at inference or linking time, while the error messages often do not directly point back to the architecture misjudgment. The issue here is not lack of cross-architecture handling ability, but an incorrect premise formed during environment perception that poisons all subsequent reasoning. • Premature abandonment caused by ambiguous prompts or code definitions: When interface definitions are ambiguous, agents easily form incorrect assumptions. For example, the ONNX Wrapper tool initially implemented only the QNN backend and later added SNPE support, but the class and function names were not updated accordingly. When an agent invoked the tool along the SNPE path and encountered an execution failure, it often attributed the failure to “SNPE not supporting the feature” rather than tracing it back to ambiguity in the wrapper interface definition, and then chose to stop instead of continuing to investigate. This failure mode shows that interface naming and documentation clarity directly affect whether the agent can correctly identify root causes. 

# 7 Engineering Lessons and Limitations 

# 7.1 Engineering Lessons 

According to the practice in this paper, AIPC works mainly because of the following factors: • Modularity comes before end-to-end monoliths: Splitting preprocessing, inference, and postprocessing is the basis for improving automation success rate. Many errors do not come from the model itself, but from surrounding logic that was not migrated consistently. • Skill packaging comes before free-form prompting: For long deployment chains, natural-language prompting alone is not enough to constrain the agent. Organizing knowledge into Skills, script tem-plates, and error references significantly reduces strategic drift. • Every step needs a verifiable exit: If the agent works too long in an unverifiable state, it will easily accumulate errors and drift away from the task goal. Golden outputs, shape checks, path checks, and numerical comparisons should therefore run through the entire workflow. • Human intervention should be treated as data, not failure: Automated deployment does not mean com-pletely eliminating human participation. A more realistic approach is to review intervention points after each task, ask the AI for analysis, and let engineers decide whether to incorporate the correspond-ing repair path into the Skill or workflow template, selectively updating the workflow and continuously improving future automation. 16 7.2 Current Limitations 

At present, AIPC still has several clear limitations: • Less-supported operators still depend on expert knowledge: When a model contains new operators for which no mature equivalent replacement exists, the agent is unlikely to invent the correct implementa-tion on its own, and expert guidance is still needed. • Agent instruction following remains unstable: Even agents with strong coding ability may ignore Skill constraints and jump into low-level command trial and error, increasing execution time and making outcomes unpredictable. • Environment complexity exceeds pure text reasoning: For example, the dual-emulation environment of Windows on ARM is complex even for human engineers, and it is even more likely to cause silent errors for agents. These problems require stronger environment detection and better tool feedback mechanisms. • Current results are still mainly case observations: The results in this paper are based primarily on case analysis from real engineering tasks rather than large-scale benchmarks with strictly controlled variables. Therefore, the conclusions are better understood as evidence of method feasibility and engineering experience than as absolute rankings of agent capability. 

# 8 Future Work 

# 8.1 Short-Term Directions 

• Context engineering and Skill-structure optimization: The next stage will continue analyzing why agents deviate from the workflow, refining context organization, prompt hierarchy, and failure-handling rules, while also improving the execution harness, step constraints, and output conventions. • Error knowledge base: We plan to build a unified error knowledge base so that, upon failure, the agent can first query known error patterns and then execute the repair. After task completion, new errors and repair paths can be written back into the knowledge base, forming a continuously evolving mechanism of “error occurs -> query knowledge base -> apply repair -> validate result -> write back new knowledge.” • Support for more model families: Future work will further explore edge-side automated deployment paths for Gemma/Qwen language models as well as models such as Stable Diffusion and PaddleOCR, in order to evaluate the cross-task generalization of AIPC. • Optimization-chain extension: Beyond quantization, AIPC will attempt to integrate pruning, mixed precision, and structured compression so that automation can move from “deployable” to “better after deployment.” 

# 8.2 Mid- and Long-Term Directions 

• Cross-backend extension: The front-end method of AIPC is not limited to QAIRT and can be extended to other target inference frameworks. • Hierarchical agents and local-small-model collaboration: Complex deployment currently still depends mainly on high-capability cloud models. In the future, one can explore letting lightweight local models handle standardized steps while falling back to cloud models for complex repairs, balancing cost, privacy, and success rate. • Infrastructure for “AI deploying AI”: At a broader level, the workflow organized by AIPC is highly similar to a compiler pass pipeline. The deployment chain can be understood as an ordered sequence of staged transformations, from a PyTorch graph to ONNX, then to QAIRT intermediate representation, and finally to a Context Binary, with each step carrying specific transformation semantics and validation constraints. In the future, deployment infrastructure may evolve into an automated pass system partially driven by AI, gradually turning deployment from an experience-intensive manual activity into composable, verifiable, and continuously evolving software infrastructure. 17 9 Conclusion 

This paper presents AIPC (AI Porting Conversion) as a technical report on AI agent-driven automation for edge AI model deployment, with Qualcomm AI Runtime (QAIRT) as the core implementation scenario. AIPC is designed not as a fully autonomous deployment agent, but as a constrained and recoverable workflow framework built around Agent Skills, auxiliary scripts, and stage-wise validation. Within the cases covered in this report, it can already automate a substantial portion of deployment work for structurally regular vision models, significantly shortening the engineering path to a runnable deployment result, lowering the expertise barrier, and reducing repetitive manual effort. For more complex models, AIPC does not yet eliminate the need for human guidance, but it still provides practical support for execution, failure localization, and bounded repair, thereby improving deployment efficiency under realistic engineering constraints. More broadly, this work suggests that the value of LLM agents in deployment lies less in unrestricted autonomy than in reliable execution within an explicitly engineered workflow. In this sense, AIPC provides a practical starting point for “AI deploying AI”: not as a claim of complete autonomy today, but as an emerging form of engineering infrastructure that can progressively reduce time, labor, and deployment cost as error knowledge accumulates, Skill structures improve, and backend coverage expands. 

# 10 Acknowledgments 

This work is an auxiliary study produced in the course of a project-driven effort. We thank our colleagues for their support, which made it possible to complete this work under tight schedules and limited time resources. We also thank former colleagues Ioannis Nousias, Mark Muir, and Adrian Giura, whose long-term collaboration style provided important engineering inspiration for this work. We also thank the relevant LLM tools and platforms for providing evaluation resources that enabled the multi-agent case study. Part of the practice in this paper was built on the open-source QAI AppBuilder project, and the resulting work has also been contributed back to the community in open-source form. We hope to continue improving the edge AI deployment automation ecosystem together with more developers. 

# 11 References 

[1] NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA TensorRT: Programmable Inference Accelerator. URL: https://developer.nvidia.com/tenso (accessed March 30, 2026). [2] Intel Corporation. OpenVINO Toolkit: Open Visual Inference and Neural Network Optimization. URL: https://docs.openvino.ai/ (accessed March 30, 2026). [3] Rockchip Electronics. RKNPU2: Rockchip Neural Processing Unit SDK. URL: https://github.com/rockchip-linux/rknpu2 (accessed March 30, 2026). [4] Anthropic. Claude Code: Agentic Coding in the Terminal. URL: https://www.anthropic.com/claude-code (accessed March 30, 2026). [5] GitHub. GitHub Copilot: AI Pair Programmer. URL: https://github.com/features/copilot (accessed March 30, 2026). [6] Anthropic. Claude Code Documentation. URL: https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code (ac-cessed March 30, 2026). [7] Cursor. Cursor: The AI-first Code Editor. URL: https://cursor.sh/ (accessed March 30, 2026). [8] Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. Qualcomm AI Runtime (QAIRT) SDK Documentation. URL: https://developer.qualcomm.com/software/qualcomm-ai-runtime (accessed March 30, 2026). [9] Linux Foundation. ONNX: Open Neural Network Exchange. URL: https://onnx.ai/ (accessed March 30, 2026). 18 [10] Adam Paszke et al. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019), pp. 8026-8037. [11] Ultralytics. Explore Ultralytics YOLOv8. URL: https://docs.ultralytics.com/models/yolov8/ (accessed March 30, 2026). [12] Xintao Wang et al. ESRGAN: Enhanced super-resolution generative adversarial networks. In: Proceed-ings of the European Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ECCVW). 2018. [13] Alec Radford et al. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In: Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). 2023, pp. 28492-28518. [14] DeepSeek-AI et al. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning. 2025. arXiv: 2501.12948 [cs.CL]. [15] Sergey Zherzdev and Alexey Gruzdev. LPRNet: License Plate Recognition via Deep Neural Networks. 2018. arXiv: 1806.10447 [cs.CV]. [16] Tao Cheng et al. YOLO-World: Real-time open-vocabulary object detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2024. [17] MiniMax. MiniMax: Large Language Model Platform. URL: https://www.minimax.io/ (accessed March 30, 2026). [18] SST. OpenCode: Open Source AI Coding Agent. URL: https://github.com/sst/opencode (accessed March 30, 2026). [19] Cline. Cline: Autonomous Coding Agent for VS Code. URL: https://cline.bot/ (accessed March 30, 2026). [20] OpenAI. Codex CLI: Lightweight Coding Agent in the Terminal. URL: https://github.com/openai/codex (accessed March 30, 2026). [21] Rijan Sapkota et al. YOLO26: Key Architectural Enhancements and Performance Benchmarking for Real-Time Object Detection. 2025. arXiv: 2509.25164 [cs.CV]. [22] Tianqi Chen et al. TVM: An automated end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learning. In: Pro-ceedings of the 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI). 2018, pp. 578-594. [23] Chris Lattner et al. MLIR: Scaling compiler infrastructure for domain specific computation. In: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO). 2021, pp. 2-14. 19