Title: Automatic Slide Updating with User-Defined Dynamic Templates and Natural Language Instructions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17894v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:43:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Automatic Slide Updating with User-Defined Dynamic Templates and Natural Language Instructions 

Kun Zhou 1,2 , Jiakai He 3, Wenmian Yang 2,† , Zhensheng Wang 1,2 , Yiquan Zhang 2, Weijia Jia 2,4,† 

> 1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, PR China 

> 2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Future Networks, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai, PR China 

> 3

Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai, PR China 

> 4

Beijing Normal-Hong Kong Baptist University, Zhuhai, PR China 

> {zhoukun, hejiakai, jensenwang}@mail.bnu.edu.cn, {wenmianyang, jiawj}@bnu.edu.cn, zhangyq987@hotmail.com

Abstract 

Presentation slides are a primary medium for data-driven reporting, yet keeping complex, analytics-style decks up to date remains labor-intensive. Existing automation methods mostly follow fixed template filling and cannot sup-port dynamic updates for diverse, user-authored slide decks. We therefore define “Dynamic Slide Update via Natural Language Instruc-tions on User-provided Templates” and intro-duce DynaSlide, a large-scale benchmark with 20,036 real-world instruction–execution triples (source slide, user instruction, target slide) grounded in a shared external database and built from business reporting slides under bring-your-own-template (BYO-template) conditions. To tackle this task, we propose SlideAgent, an agent-based framework that combines multi-modal slide parsing, natural language instruc-tion grounding, and tool-augmented reason-ing for tables, charts, and textual conclusions. SlideAgent updates content while preserving layout and style, providing a strong reference baseline on DynaSlide. We further design end-to-end and component-level evaluation proto-cols that reveal key challenges and opportuni-ties for future research. The dataset and code are available at https://github.com/XiaoZ hou2024/SlideAgent .

1 Introduction 

Presentation slides are a core medium for integrat-ing data, logical argumentation, and information dissemination in enterprise decision-making, mar-ket communication, and academic exchange (Fu et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2025; Ge et al., 2025). In data-driven settings such as business and oper-ations analytics, high-quality slides must not only present key figures and conclusions accurately, but also preserve professional layout, narrative coher-ence, and stylistic consistency (Liao et al., 2025; 

> †Corresponding authors.

Yang et al., 2025). However, current slide produc-tion remains a labor-intensive, multi-stage process. From template selection, heterogeneous data collec-tion, cleaning, and analysis, to chart design, insight writing, and final style unification, the workflow is cumbersome, requires specialized expertise, and is prone to error(Ge et al., 2025; Chia et al., 2025). A more critical bottleneck lies in the iterative updating of report-style slide decks. In periodic business reports (e.g., weekly, monthly, or quar-terly), updates usually involve local data replace-ment and minor adjustments to conclusions, while the overall structure and visual style remain stable (Warner et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2025). As a re-sult, valuable human resources are consumed by low-value “copy–paste–modify” routines. This cre-ates a clear motivation: reuse existing high-quality slide decks as personalized templates, and allow users to issue natural language instructions that drive automatic, dynamic data updates and content regeneration—while preserving the original design with high fidelity (Yang et al., 2025; Ge et al., 2025; Masry et al., 2025). Such a capability would sub-stantially improve production efficiency and reduce human error(Long et al., 2024). Existing work falls short of this goal. Most related approaches adopt a fixed-template filling paradigm, where systems extract information from structured sources and inject it into rigid, pre-defined templates (Liao et al., 2025). These meth-ods cannot handle diverse, user-authored slide decks with complex, idiosyncratic structures, and therefore fail to support realistic bring-your-own-template (BYO-template) scenarios. This gap lim-its the practical deployment of current document automation techniques (Livathinos et al., 2025; Ouyang et al., 2025). In contrast to simple template filling, dynamic content update on user-provided slides is substan-tially more challenging (Faysse et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2026), which requires an end-to-end intel-

> arXiv:2604.17894v1 [cs.CL] 20 Apr 2026

ligent workflow. First, the system must perform strong multimodal document understanding, con-structing a structured, element-level representation of arbitrary slide decks: identifying title hierar-chies, body text, numerical values in tables, un-derlying data series in charts, and summary-level conclusions, together with their layout and depen-dencies(Verma et al., 2025; Shen et al., 2022). Sec-ond, the system must ground natural language up-date instructions into concrete, executable oper-ations over this representation and the underly-ing data sources. Third and most challenging, it must achieve intelligent content synchronization between old and new data. This goes far beyond simple value substitution: it forms a closed-loop perception–reasoning–execution process that may involve external code execution to recompute statis-tics, charting engines to re-render visualizations, and language models to infer revised analytical con-clusions(Masry et al., 2025; Lompo and Haraoui, 2025). This tightly integrates multimodal under-standing, user-intent modeling, data retrieval, tool invocation, and advanced reasoning into a tech-nically demanding pipeline(Su et al., 2025; Ding et al., 2024). To our knowledge, this direction has received limited attention in prior work. To systematically address this gap, we formally define the task of Dynamic Slide Update via Natu-ral Language Instructions on User-provided Tem-plates. The task evaluates a system’s end-to-end ability, given an arbitrary user slide deck as a dy-namic template, to (i) locate and query relevant data, (ii) update tables and charts, (iii) revise tex-tual conclusions, and (iv) generate an updated slide deck that preserves the original design with high fidelity while reflecting the new data and instruc-tions. To support research on this task, we introduce DynaSlide, to our knowledge, the first benchmark for dynamic slide update under BYO-template con-ditions. Built on real-world real-estate analyt-ics data from Beijing, Guangzhou, and Shenzhen (2020–2024), DynaSlide organizes raw data into structured PostgreSQL tables and curates diverse slide templates that mirror authentic business re-porting scenarios. We construct 20,036 instruc-tion–execution triples of the form “source slide deck – user instruction – target slide deck,” all grounded in a shared external PostgreSQL database that provides the underlying real-estate transaction records. Each triple is annotated with executable update instructions and corresponding data queries, covering a broad spectrum of business themes and statistical operations. We provide standardized train/validation/test splits and task variants to fa-cilitate model development, ablation studies, and fine-grained evaluation. To probe these challenges in a realistic setting and provide a strong reference point, we develop SlideAgent, an agent-based baseline system that automates slide updates via structured reasoning and tool orchestration. SlideAgent uses a large language model as a central controller that plans and coordinates specialized tools across two tightly coupled stages: (1) slide parsing and representation, where it constructs a hierarchical representation of slide elements and layout that captures semantic content, visual structure, and data dependencies; and (2) instruction-driven content synchronization, where it interprets natural language update instruc-tions, maps them to data and document operations, calls external tools for data querying, computation, and chart rendering, and synthesizes revised textual content and conclusions. Throughout this process, SlideAgent maintains structured logs of its actions, which we use for reproducibility and fine-grained evaluation and error analysis on DynaSlide. The main contributions of this paper are as fol-lows: • We formally define Dynamic Slide Update via Natural Language Instructions on User-provided Templates and release DynaSlide, a large-scale benchmark with over 20k instruc-tion–execution triples (“source slide – instruc-tion – target slide”) grounded in a shared ex-ternal database and constructed from realistic business reports. • We develop SlideAgent, an agent-based sys-tem that orchestrates multimodal slide pars-ing, instruction grounding, and tool execution, providing a strong reference baseline for this task. • We design end-to-end and module-level eval-uation protocols on DynaSlide, and conduct detailed error analysis that reveals key chal-lenges for future methods. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Automatic Slide Generation vs. Dynamic Update 

Research in presentation automation (Mondal et al., 2024; Bandyopadhyay et al., 2024) predominantly targets document-to-slide generation , converting long-form inputs into slide decks. Recent sys-tems such as SlideSpawn (Kumar and Chowdary, 2024), AutoPresent (Ge et al., 2025), and PPTA-gent (Zheng et al., 2025) extend this paradigm by incorporating layout planning and visual verifica-tion. However, these methods rely on fixed tem-plate libraries or generative layouts, treating slide creation as a one-off task. In contrast, our Dynamic Slide Update task addresses the novel challenge of updating user-provided templates while preserving their custom layouts and maintaining the logical dependencies between data, functions, and content elements. 

2.2 LLM Agents for Slide Automation 

LLM-based systems advance presentation automa-tion through hierarchical text planning and mul-timodal parsing (Yue et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2022). Recent work integrates vision-language models for semantic understand-ing (Pang et al., 2025; Ge et al., 2025) and mod-ular tool invocation (Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023). Yet these frame-works remain fundamentally limited: they up-date surface-level content (text, layout) but cannot reconstruct the underlying computational depen-dencies—table formulas, parameter propagation, and database queries—required for coherent mul-timodal updates. They lack support for dynamic, user-defined templates demanding coordinated mul-timodal updates. Our framework addresses this gap by integrating structured instruction parsing, multi-modal layout analysis, and tool invocation to enable data-consistent updates across complex, real-world slides. 

3 DynaSlide Dataset 

DynaSlide is a large-scale benchmark designed to evaluate dynamic slide update on user-provided templates. Each instance is formulated as an instruction–execution task, consisting of (i) a source slide, (ii) a natural language update instruc-tion, and (iii) a target slide generated by executing the instruction over a shared external PostgreSQL database of real-estate transactions. All slides are constructed from a family of controllable templates that factorize each slide into four element types, i.e., Title, Table, Chart, and Summary, and are grounded in executable metadata (SQL templates, statistical functions, and layout annotations) stored in YAML files. All textual content in DynaSlide (titles, captions, headers, and summaries) is in En-glish; we design templates in the original language used in real-world reports and then translate them into English following a controlled protocol (see Appendix A.1) 

3.1 Data Collection 

We collected large-scale residential transaction records spanning 2020–2024 from three major cities in China: Beijing, Guangzhou, and Shen-zhen, covering both new and resale housing mar-kets. Each record contains nine fields covering time, location, and transaction attributes (e.g., trans-action date, city, block, project, supply volume, sales volume, transaction price, floor area, and unit price); detailed field descriptions are provided in Appendix A.2. Following previous work (Wang et al., 2025), we source data from official and public real-estate transaction platforms, and apply three cleaning filters: (1) excluding records with missing critical attributes; (2) normalizing city and block names to ensure spatial consistency; and (3) retaining only blocks with at least 500 transactions to avoid sparsity. After cleaning, we obtain 1.79 million valid transaction records. These records are partitioned by city × market-type (new vs. resale), resulting in six relational tables. We release the processed records as a PostgreSQL database dump, which serves as the shared external data source for all slide generation and instruction execution. 

3.2 Template Design 

Since dynamic updates in real-world reporting pri-marily operate on titles, tables, charts, and sum-maries, we restrict DynaSlide to these four el-ement types, which jointly cover textual, tabu-lar, and analytical visual content. In consultation with real-estate domain experts, we determine six commonly used presentation themes and define 34 sub-templates as atomic layout units (see Ap-pendix A.3). Each sub-template specifies both the slide layout (element roles and positions) and the table-centric computation logic used to populate the slide. The template and example of each ele-ment is illustrated in Figure 1, and the detailed de-scriptions of templates are shown in Appendix A.4. 

3.2.1 Title template design 

For each theme, we design three title templates that expose the statistical methodology and analytical perspective. During source slide generation, each Template Example                                        

> Table_Caption: {start_year} {end_year} {city} {block} Supply and Transaction Unit Statistics in from to ，
> SQL: Select FROM {table_caption} WHERE city = {city} AND block = {block} AND date_code >= {start_date} AND date_code <= {end_date} "supply_sets", "trade_sets"
> Statistics_Function: Compute_supply_and_trades_stats( {raw_data} ，{area_range_size }）
> Table_Caption: 2020 2022 Beijing Liangxiang Supply and Transaction Unit Statistics in from to ，
> SQL: Select FROM Beijing_new_house WHERE city = Beijing block = AND date_code >= 2020-01-01 AND date_code <= 2024-12-31 "supply_sets", "trade_sets" AND
> Statistics_Function: Compute_supply_and_trades_stats( raw_data ，20 ）{headers}
> Liangxiang
> Summary: {start_year} {end_year} {block}'s core supply-demand area was to From {MainUnitType}
> {ImprovedUnitType}
> ，
> with improved units centered on
> 140-160m²
> Summary: 2020 2022 core supply-demand area was to From ，
> with improved units centered on
> Liangxiang's 100-120m²
> ，{headers}
> ，

Figure 1: Illustration of the template filling. 

instantiated sub-template randomly selects one ti-tle template to introduce lexical variation while preserving analytical intent. 

3.2.2 Table template design 

Tables consist of a caption and a table body. In practical business presentation, the table caption typically specifies the analysis topic and data scope, while the table body aggregates and statistically summarized results, e.g., shows monthly sales sum-maries across regions. For each theme, domain experts define a set of statistical analyses captured by 11 statistical functions Fk. Each table body is generated by pairing an SQL query template 

SQL k with a statistical function Fk: SQL k speci-fies which subset of records to retrieve from Post-greSQL under the slide’s scope, while Fk specifies how to aggregate and summarize the retrieved data into table cells. 

Caption generation. Captions describe the an-alytic scope (e.g., city/block and time span) us-ing variable-based templates. As illustrated in Fig-ure 1, each caption template combines fixed text (in black) with variable placeholders (in color). For each statistical function, we design three caption templates Cp (33 in total). We instantiate placehold-ers via a released “Field Mapping Dictionary” that maps template variables to concrete database fields and valid values (see Table 6 in Appendix A.4.2). Importantly, the same resolved variables are shared by the caption and the SQL template, ensuring that the caption’s semantics and the retrieved data are aligned. 

Table body generation and linguistic diversity. 

After resolving variables, we populate SQL k to retrieve raw records, sample function-specific pa-rameters from a released “Parameter Candidate Dictionary” (see Table 7 in Appendix A.4.2), and then apply Fk to compute the table body. To di-versify surface forms without changing semantics, we decouple header generation using a released “Header Alias Dictionary” that maps canonical met-rics to synonymous header variants (see Table 8 in Appendix A.4.2). Computed outputs are nor-malized into canonical table structures for consis-tent rendering and evaluation (see Figure 4 in Ap-pendix A.4.2). 

3.2.3 Chart template design 

Charts are visual projections of the same computed data used in tables (“homologous data, heteroge-neous presentation”). We reuse SQL k and Fk to obtain the underlying series and render bar/line charts according to the chart type specified by the sub-template. 

3.2.4 Summary template design 

Summaries synthesize computed tables into textual insights. For each Fk, we select and calculate 2-4 key metrics (e.g., trends, growth rates, peak values) from the table output. Based on these metrics, we select combinations of three sets of metrics, result-ing in a total of 33 summary templates Summary q.Similar to table generation, summary templates are instantiated by leveraging the Field Mapping Dic-tionary to resolve variable placeholders, ensuring semantic consistency across titles, captions, tables, charts, and summaries within a slide. 

3.2.5 Source slide Generation 

We implement “EasySlide”, a toolkit built on 

python-pptx , to render titles, tables, charts, and summaries while enforcing consistent layout and typography. For each source slide, we release a YAML file recording (i) slide_filters (database tables, SQL k, Fk, resolved variables, and pa-rameters) and (ii) template_slide (element roles and layout), providing precise grounding for downstream dynamic updates. More details for “EasySlide” and source slide generation, see Ap-pendix A.5. This systematic process yields 7,685 distinct source slides as the foundation for our dataset. By applying multiple update instructions to each source slide, we further construct the final instruction–execution benchmark. 

3.3 User Instruction and Target Slide Generation 

Each instruction–execution triple shares the same PostgreSQL database (Section 3.1). We design two update scenarios: (1) Basic Replacement, which updates only core scope variables (e.g., time span or region) while keeping Fk unchanged; and (2) Customized-Parameter, which additionally modi-fies constraint parameters (e.g., area segmentation or price granularity), triggering cascading updates in both SQL retrieval and statistical computation. Instructions are sampled from 24 templates, and all variable changes are stored as query_filters 

in YAML. Execution merges slide_filters with 

query_filters into update_filters , re-queries PostgreSQL, recomputes the table (via SQL k and 

Fk), and synchronizes charts and summaries ac-cordingly. Target slides are rendered to preserve the source slide’s layout and style. More details are shown in Appendix A.6. 

3.4 Dataset Statistics 

Our DynaSlide contains 20,036 instruction– execution samples. We split the dataset into train/validation/test with a 6:2:2 ratio (12,022 / 4,007 / 4,007), and enforce zero overlap of sub-templates across splits to evaluate generalization to unseen layouts. We release all source/target slides (PPTX), the PostgreSQL database dump, YAML metadata, and the three template dictionaries, en-abling reproducible end-to-end and component-level evaluation. More details are shown in Ap-pendix A.7. 

4 Method 

To address the challenges posed by DynaSlide, we develop SlideAgent, an agent-based baseline sys-tem for automated slide updates. As shown in Fig-ure 2, SlideAgent adopts a two-stage architecture. Stage 1 (Slide Understanding) parses the input slide into a structured representation that captures ele-ment locations, data sources, and functional logic. Stage 2 (Instruction-Driven Update) interprets user instructions, retrieves updated data, executes the re-quired transformations, and regenerates consistent textual, tabular, and visual content. 

4.1 Slide Parsing and Representation 

Accurate automated slide updates require both pre-cise element localization and explicit recovery of the underlying data logic. We decompose this stage into two sub-tasks: multimodal layout parsing, which identifies semantic roles and spatial struc-tures, and logic extraction, which recovers the data sources and aggregation logic for tables and charts. 

4.1.1 Multimodal Slide Layout Parsing 

Accurate identification of slide elements is essential for automated updates. However, programmatic slide libraries such as python-pptx provide lim-ited semantic information, making it difficult to distinguish functional roles (e.g., titles, captions, or summaries) in complex layouts. SlideAgent addresses this limitation by combin-ing a vision–language model (VLM) with struc-tured PPTX parsing provided by the python-pptx 

library to jointly recover semantic and geometric in-formation. Specifically, each slide is first rendered as a PNG image and processed by Qwen-72B-VL using structured prompts (see Appendix B.1). The VLM predicts semantic labels (e.g., title or table caption) along with approximate bounding boxes for visible elements. In parallel, python-pptx 

parses the underlying PPTX file to extract precise spatial coordinates and style metadata for all shape objects, as shown in Figure 2. We then align VLM predictions with PPTX shapes using an Intersection over Union (IoU) matching strategy (Farhadi et al., 2018). When the IoU exceeds a threshold of 0.5, the predicted semantic label is associated with the shape’s ex-act geometry and style attributes. The resulting structured representation records each element’s type, content, bounding box, and style information (Details see Appendix B.2). 

4.1.2 Table and Chart Logic Extraction 

With accurately identified slide elements, in this section, we further reconstruct the underlying data logic for tables and charts, bridging the gap be-tween the aggregated statistical data in the slides and the raw data. This requires reasoning over implicit data sources and statistical function logic. Since charts are visual representations of table data, we handle their logic extraction uniformly. This overall task presents two key challenges: (1) map-ping aggregated statistics to the correct database sources and (2) recovering the aggregation logic used to generate them. We decompose this pro-cess into data source extraction and function logic extraction. 

Data Source Extraction: Recovering the raw data for tables and charts requires precise database queries. However, slides typically display high-level aggregated statistics (e.g., quarterly sales sum-maries), whereas databases store low-level granu-lar records (e.g., individual transactions). Conse-quently, directly generating SQL from slide text is error-prone, since schema details of databases, such as table names and specific fields, are often STAGE  I:  Slide Understanding                           

> Python -pptx
> VLM
> Slide IoU
> Matching
> Structured Layout
> 1. Multimodal Slide Layout Parsing 2. Table & Chart Logic Ecxtraction
> STAGE II: Instruction -Driven Update
> User
> Instruction Tools Invocation
> & Re -calculation
> Summary
> Update
> Data
> Retrieval
> Slide Update
> Chart/Table
> Function Logic Extraction
> [Caption]
> 2021 -2023 Supply and Transaction
> Unit Statistics in Guangzhou's Chahe
> Village
> [Headers] Supply Count 、Sales Count
> Slot Data
> city Guangzhou
> block ChaheVillage
> …… ……
> Data Source Extraction Role: Title
> Role: Conclusion
> Role: Table
> (x, y): (10px, 3px)
> (w, h): (25px, 10px)
> Root
> Title
> Conclusion
> Content Body
> Chart
> Table
> (x,y)
> (w,h)
> data
> 3. Instruction Parsing
> Shape 1
> Shape 2
> Shape 3 :
> (x,y) :(10.2,3.3)
> (w,h):(25,11.4)
> data
> Parameter Update
> block: Liangxiang
> date: 2020 -2022
> …
> Function Call Generic Interface Call
> eg. compute_supply_sales_
> counts_stats (raw _data ,…)
> synthesize _analytical _table
> (S, H, C, F, O )
> Close -Domain Open -Domain
> Slide
> Update the slide to show
> Beijing Liangxiang data
> for 2020 -2022 with an
> area segment of 20 m² .

Figure 2: Overview of SlideAgent. The framework operates in two stages: (1) Slide Understanding , which parses layout and extracts logic; and (2) Instruction-Driven Update , which executes data queries and regenerates content. 

implicit in the context of slides. To address this, SlideAgent employs a schema-aligned slot-filling mechanism. We define nine standardized slots corresponding to the nine fields in the DynaSlide database (in Section 3.1). Dur-ing extraction, schema cues are primarily drawn from two sources accessible via python-pptx in the slides: table captions, which encode analysis scope (e.g., time span or region), and table headers or chart series names, which indicate data dimen-sions. An LLM infers the target database table name and populates the corresponding slots based on the in-context learning (Details of prompts see Appendix B.1), producing a structured JSON ob-ject that grounds each slide element to a concrete database context. 

Function Logic Extraction To recover the com-putational logic transforming raw data into final table presentations, we distinguish two scenarios based on the availability of the underlying func-tion definitions: a closed-domain scenario, and an open-domain scenario. In the closed-domain scenario, we assume that tables are generated by a finite set of statistical func-tions known to the system. Specifically, SlideAgent maintains exact definitions for the 11 predefined functions described in Section 3.2.2. These func-tions are exposed to the LLM as callable tools with explicit parameter schemas. Logic extraction is formulated as a function-calling task: given a tar-get table, the LLM identifies the corresponding function and extracts its arguments. The recovered function and parameters are then used to directly invoke the intended computation logic. Details of tool descriptions and prompts see Appendix B.1. In the open-domain scenario, the system has no prior knowledge of the specific function used to generate a table. This setting reflects real-world usage, where users may create arbitrary, custom analyses not covered by predefined templates. Al-though the specific generative function is unknown, the fundamental statistical methods (e.g., aggrega-tion types, filtering metrics) remain analyzable. We therefore design a generic processing in-terface, synthesize_analytical_table , which reconstructs aggregation logic from atomic com-ponents parsed by the LLM. The interface oper-ates on raw_data and is parameterized by five components: (i) Table Structure Type , categoriz-ing the layout into canonical table structures (see Appendix A.4.2); (ii) Headers , defining row and column dimensions; (iii) Constraint Spec , specify-ing binning or filtering logic with boundaries and step sizes; (iv) Source Fields , identifying required database columns (e.g., dim_price ); and (v) Oper-ations , defining aggregation functions (e.g., SUM, AVG, COUNT). The LLM decomposes the unknown logic into these parameters, which are assembled into an exe-cutable computation pipeline (see Algorithm 1 in Appendix B.3 for implementation details). 

4.2 Instruction-Driven Update 

With the slide structure and logic extracted in Stage 1, Stage 2 performs dynamic updates fol-lowing a four-step pipeline: instruction parsing, data retrieval, logic execution, and summary regen-eration. 

4.2.1 User Instruction Parsing 

User instructions specify updated data constraints or logic modifications in natural language. We model this step as a state update task, as illustrated in Figure 2. The system takes the user instruc-tion and the current parameter state (target table name, slots, and function parameters) as input, and prompts (see Appendix B.1) an LLM to update relevant fields while strictly preserving the JSON schema. The output is a new parameter state that serves as the executable specification for down-stream processing. 4.2.2 SQL Generation and Data Retrieval 

User instructions typically dictate specific data con-straints or logic modifications. We thus model this task as a state update problem, where the system takes the user instruction and the current parame-ter state (a JSON object containing the target table name, slot values, and function logic parameters defined in Section 4.1.2) as input. Using structured prompts (see Appendix B.1), the LLM updates the relevant fields in the JSON object to reflect the user’s instructions while preserving the schema structure. The output is a target parameter state 

containing updated slots and function arguments, which serves as the executable specification for subsequent steps. 

4.2.3 Tool Invocation and Data Re-calculation 

Using the updated raw data and function parame-ters, SlideAgent re-executes the computation logic. Closed-domain tables invoke the corresponding predefined functions, while open-domain tables invoke synthesize_analytical_table with re-constructed logic parameters. Both cases yield up-dated aggregated statistical data. 

4.2.4 Summary Update and Final Rendering 

Since data updates may invalidate existing sum-maries, we introduce a fact-aware summary gen-eration module. Given the original summary, the pre-update data, and the post-update data, the LLM rewrites the summary to reflect the updated trends. Details of the prompts are shown in Appendix B.1. Finally, SlideAgent repopulates the slide with updated tables, charts, and summaries using the spatial coordinates and style metadata extracted in Stage 1 (Section 4.1), ensuring strict preservation of the original layout and visual design. 

5 Experiments 

Dynamic slide update on user-provided templates is a newly introduced task and lacks directly com-parable baselines. Accordingly, our experiments focus on: (1) comparing task success rates across different LLM backbones; (2) analyzing update ac-curacy across element types (Title, Table, Chart, Summary). 

5.1 Implementation Details 

We evaluate SlideAgent using five open-weight models as reasoning backbones: GPT-OSS (120B, 20B) and Qwen3-Instruct (80B, 30B, 14B). Qwen2.5-VL-72B is employed specifically for multimodal layout parsing. Detailed experimen-tal configurations, including prompting strategies, software infrastructure (e.g., LangGraph, vLLM), and hardware specifications, are provided in Ap-pendix C.1. 

5.2 Evaluation Metrics 

We adopt two quantitative metrics. Task Success Rate (SR) is the primary metric, defined as the percentage of test cases in which the generated slide exactly matches the ground truth in both con-tent (text and data values) and layout structure. To further analyze modality-specific performance, we report Element-Level Accuracy, measuring the up-date success rates for Titles, Tables, Charts, and Summaries individually. 

5.3 Main Results 

Table 1 reports the performance of SlideAgent across six presentation themes under both closed-domain and open-domain settings. The results yield three key observations regarding the com-plexity of dynamic slide updates. First, model scale strongly correlates with task performance. GPT-OSS-120B achieves the highest success rates, reaching 80.64% in closed-domain and 68.86% in open-domain scenarios, exceeding its 20B counterpart by over 11% and 12%, respec-tively. A similar trend is observed for Qwen3 mod-els, where Qwen3-80B (75.33% / 63.91%) substan-tially outperforms Qwen3-14B (45.48% / 31.13%). This large performance gap reflects the intrinsic difficulty of dynamic slide updates, which require a long chain of perception, querying, and computa-tion. Errors in any intermediate step can invalidate the final output, and smaller models often fail to maintain strict instruction adherence over extended reasoning trajectories. In contrast, larger models demonstrate greater robustness in handling long-context, multi-step workflows. Second, open-domain scenarios consistently degrade performance, disproportionately affect-ing smaller models. While GPT-OSS-120B shows a moderate 14.6% relative decline (80.64% →68.86%), Qwen3-14B exhibits a much larger 31.5% relative decline (45.48% →31.13%). This pattern aligns with the differing requirements of the two logic extraction modes: closed-domain update mainly involves selecting from a predefined function library, whereas open-domain update requires reconstructing computation logic from scratch, where larger models show stronger Model Theme 1 Theme 2 Theme 3 Theme 4 Theme 5 Theme 6 Average Cls Opn Cls Opn Cls Opn Cls Opn Cls Opn Cls Opn Cls Opn                                                                       

> GPT-OSS-120B 90.12 78.29 71.83 70.91 78.48 62.56 77.03 58.17 81.01 72.31 85.36 70.89 80.64 68.86 GPT-OSS-20B 81.48 68.45 61.55 57.14 65.95 49.62 61.69 44.17 67.09 60.40 77.45 57.72 69.20 56.25 Qwen3-80B 87.65 75.69 70.14 65.68 73.42 60.27 67.53 53.67 69.62 62.84 83.64 65.32 75.33 63.91 Qwen3-30B 85.06 71.06 63.38 61.50 68.35 54.95 63.64 48.00 68.35 61.26 79.64 61.39 71.40 59.69 Qwen3-14B 50.74 29.09 50.70 29.09 34.18 25.11 38.96 31.67 45.57 35.01 52.73 37.22 45.48 31.13

Table 1: Task Success Rates (%) of SlideAgent across six presentation themes using different LLM backbones. Columns Cls and Opn denote Closed-Domain and Open-Domain update scenarios, respectively. GPT-OSS     

> 120B
> GPT-OSS
> 20B
> Qwen3
> 80B
> Qwen3
> 30B
> Qwen3
> 14B
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Success Rate (%)
> Caption Table/Chart Summary Closed Open

Figure 3: Element-level accuracy across closed-domain (Cls) and open-domain (Opn) scenarios. 

generalization beyond template memorization. Third, task difficulty varies significantly across presentation themes. Taking GPT-OSS-120B as an example, Theme 1 achieves 90.12% in closed-domain settings, whereas Themes 2, 3, and 4 pose substantially greater challenges, reaching only 71.83%, 78.48%, and 77.03%, respectively. This variation reflects the differing demands placed on the perception–querying–computation pipeline. Theme 1 primarily involves simple table structures and basic statistical operations, facilitating reli-able layout parsing and field mapping. In contrast, Themes 2- 4 require complex cross-dimensional ag-gregations and multi-layer constraints, which am-plify the likelihood of errors during logic extraction and SQL generation. These results indicate that, even under identical database schemas and model architectures, intrinsic task complexity remains a critical bottleneck for automation. Figure 3 further breaks down performance by element type. Caption updates consistently achieve high accuracy across all models, as they largely involve direct substitution of constraint parame-ters (e.g., dates or locations) with minimal reason-ing. In contrast, Table and Chart updates are sub-stantially more challenging, with accuracy ranging from 66.23% to 86.67% in closed-domain settings and dropping to 60.82%–79.24% in open-domain settings. This degradation empirically supports the analysis in Section 4.1.2: open-domain scenar-ios require models to reverse-engineer aggregation logic from visual and textual cues rather than select-ing predefined functions, increasing error accumu-lation during SQL generation. Summary updates exhibit the highest failure rates, particularly for smaller models (e.g., Qwen3-14B drops to 37.61% in open-domain settings), confirming that summary generation is a fact-aware reasoning task that re-quires strict consistency between recomputed val-ues and the textual narrative—a capability that scales strongly with model size. To provide deeper insights into the performance bottlenecks of dynamic slide updates, we conduct module-wise evaluations that isolate the accuracy of individual pipeline components. This analysis enables fine-grained understanding of where cur-rent systems succeed and where they encounter fundamental challenges. The Multimodal Slide Layout Parsing module achieves 99.5% accuracy in our evaluation. Since this module consistently uses Qwen2.5-VL-72B for layout parsing across all settings, the layout parsing results remain identical for all model vari-ants. Given that each PowerPoint slide typically contains only 4–6 elements, the layout structure is relatively simple, which also makes the parsing task more stable. The accuracy of six core modules in open-domain scenarios is reported in Table 2. In this setting, the system is required to reconstruct com-putation logic without access to predefined function libraries. The evaluation assesses the fidelity of in-termediate outputs at each stage of the SlideAgent pipeline, measuring how accurately each compo-nent executes its specific sub-task. Several critical patterns emerge from these re-sults. Function Logic Extraction and Data Source Extraction consistently achieve the highest accu-Model Func. Logic Data Src. Instr. Parse SQL Gen. Tool Inv. Sum. Upd. Task SR †                                           

> GPT-OSS-120B 88.34 90.37 85.69 85.56 79.24 68.44 68.86 GPT-OSS-20B 74.63 77.96 76.44 76.21 69.13 56.30 56.25 Qwen3-80B 87.19 86.14 82.63 82.43 77.16 64.72 63.91 Qwen3-30B 81.55 82.40 78.59 79.54 73.20 60.51 59.69 Qwen3-14B 63.38 70.17 70.35 73.09 60.82 31.25 31.13
> Table 2: Module-wise accuracy (%) in open-domain scenarios. Task SR †denotes the end-to-end Task Success Rate from Table 1 for comparison. Abbreviations: Func. Logic : Function Logic Extraction, Data Src. : Data Source Extraction, Instr. Parse : User Instruction Parsing, SQL Gen. : SQL Generation, Tool Inv. : Tool Invocation, Sum. Upd. : Summary Update.

racy across all models, with GPT-OSS-120B reach-ing 88.34% and 90.37% respectively. This indi-cates that larger models possess strong capabilities in reverse-engineering statistical operations and mapping slide content to database schemas. In contrast, Summary Update presents the most significant challenge, with accuracy dropping sub-stantially across all model scales. GPT-OSS-120B achieves only 68.44% on this module, while smaller models like Qwen3-14B fall to 31.25%. This confirms our hypothesis that summary genera-tion requires sophisticated fact-aware reasoning to ensure textual narratives faithfully reflect updated data trends—a capability that scales strongly with model capacity. The performance gap between Function Logic Extraction and Summary Update (19.90 percentage points for GPT-OSS-120B) reveals a key insight: while models can effectively extract and execute computational logic, translating quantitative up-dates into coherent natural language conclusions re-mains a fundamental bottleneck. This suggests that future work should prioritize developing special-ized modules for cross-modal consistency checking and data-grounded text generation. Model scale demonstrates consistent impact across all modules. Comparing GPT-OSS-120B to GPT-OSS-20B, we observe improvements of 13.71 points in Function Logic Extraction, 12.41 points in Data Source Extraction, and 12.14 points in Summary Update. These gains highlight that high-order reasoning tasks in dynamic slide up-dates benefit substantially from increased model capacity. To further assess generalization beyond the main benchmark setting, we conduct two supple-mentary experiments and summarize a represen-tative case study before concluding. First, on 500 randomly sampled template-generated cases, stronger models continue to outperform weaker ones across both closed and open settings, with closed-source models remaining consistently ahead of open-weight alternatives. The relative ranking among open-weight models is also preserved, in-dicating that the end-to-end slide updating task is strongly capability-dependent. Second, we com-pare the same sampled cases with human-authored slides and observe broadly consistent trends, sug-gesting that DynaSlide evaluates generalizable slide-updating ability rather than template-specific matching. We additionally analyze representative failure modes of SlideAgent through a case study. The results show that failures mainly stem from er-ror accumulation across the perception–reasoning– execution pipeline and from the difficulty of main-taining numerically precise summary rewriting in the final stage. Together, these observations further highlight that the central challenge lies not only in executing each module correctly, but also in pre-serving cross-module consistency through to the final narrative. Detailed results and discussion are provided in Appendix C.2, and Appendix C.3. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we formalize the task of “Dynamic Slide Update via Natural Language Instructions on User-provided Templates”, addressing realis-tic bring-your-own-template scenarios that are not supported by existing template-based methods. To facilitate systematic research, we introduce Dy-naSlide, a large-scale benchmark with 20,036 real-world instruction–execution triples grounded in a shared external database. We further propose SlideAgent, an agent-based framework that com-bines multimodal slide parsing, instruction ground-ing, and tool-augmented reasoning to update ta-bles, charts, and textual conclusions while preserv-ing layout and style. Extensive evaluations reveal key challenges in logic reconstruction, cross-modal consistency, and fact-aware summary generation. Limitations 

This study has several limitations that do not un-dermine its contributions. First, our benchmark focuses exclusively on the real estate domain (e.g., housing transaction data, price trends, supply-demand analysis). This is not a limitation of capa-bility, but a deliberate design to ensure data com-plexity: real estate data exhibits rich interdepen-dencies—such as how price changes affect sales volume, or how regional supply impacts unit pric-ing—that are ideal for stress-testing an agent’s numerical reasoning and multi-variable coordina-tion. The core mechanism—interpreting natural language instructions, querying a database, updat-ing tables/charts, and regenerating summaries—is domain-agnostic and directly applicable to other data-intensive sectors (e.g., financial earnings re-ports, supply chain dashboards, clinical trial sum-maries) where similar logic consistency is required. We chose depth over breadth: mastering one com-plex domain provides stronger evidence of reason-ing capability than superficial coverage of many simple domains. Second, DynaSlide employs a family of control-lable templates rather than uncurated slides scraped from the web. This decision sacrifices some stylis-tic diversity to ensure executable ground truth. In a benchmark setting, verifiable correctness is essen-tial; using arbitrary wild files would preclude the automated, deterministic evaluation of table val-ues and chart series. Our templates thus serve as a standardized testbed where layout fidelity and con-tent accuracy can be rigorously measured, avoiding the evaluation noise inherent in open-ended gener-ation tasks. Future work may explore adapting our logic-driven update engine to noisier, unstructured layout parsers once the core reasoning framework is established. Third, our framework operates on the premise that slide elements are grounded to a structured database (PostgreSQL). This alignment reflects standard enterprise workflows, where periodic re-ports (e.g., monthly reviews) are typically derived from pre-established data warehouses. Conse-quently, our system addresses the update phase of the reporting lifecycle. The "cold start" prob-lem—reconstructing structured databases from legacy static presentations—constitutes a distinct document understanding challenge requiring chart de-rendering and schema inference, which are or-thogonal to our focus on logically consistent up-dates. Our approach targets the high-frequency sce-nario of maintaining reports with accessible data lineages, a scope covering a significant portion of automated reporting needs. Finally, our work prioritizes the analytical core of presentations: tables, charts, and data-driven summaries. We do not currently handle decorative graphics or conceptual diagrams. This scope is motivated by the observation that in periodic re-porting, analytical elements account for the vast majority (>90%) of content modifications. By fo-cusing on these high-frequency update targets, we achieve broad multimodal coverage—spanning nu-merical reasoning, visual rendering, and natural language generation—while maintaining engineer-ing tractability. Supporting non-analytical visual content would require additional perception mod-ules (e.g., for semantic style transfer) that are com-plementary to, but distinct from, the logical update problem addressed here. 

Acknowledgments 

This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) un-der Grant 62272050 and the grant of Beijing Normal- Hong Kong Baptist University sponsored by Guangdong Provincial Department of Educa-tion; in part by Zhuhai Science-Tech Innovation Bureau under Grant No. 2320004002772 and the Interdisciplinary Intelligence Super Computer Cen-ter of Beijing Normal University (Zhuhai). 

References    

> Sambaran Bandyopadhyay, Himanshu Maheshwari, Anandhavelu Natarajan, and Apoorv Saxena. 2024. Enhancing presentation slide generation by llms with a multi-staged end-to-end approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06556 .Qiguang Chen, Libo Qin, Jinhao Liu, Dengyun Peng, Jiannan Guan, Peng Wang, Mengkang Hu, Yuhang Zhou, Te Gao, and Wanxiang Che. 2025. Towards reasoning era: A survey of long chain-of-thought for reasoning large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09567 .Yew Ken Chia, Liying Cheng, Hou Pong Chan, Mao-jia Song, Chaoqun Liu, Mahani Aljunied, Soujanya Poria, and Lidong Bing. 2025. M-longdoc: A bench-mark for multimodal super-long document under-standing and a retrieval-aware tuning framework. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empir-ical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9244–9261.

Xuanwen Ding, Jie Zhou, Liang Dou, Qin Chen, Yuan-bin Wu, Arlene Chen, and Liang He. 2024. Boosting large language models with continual learning for aspect-based sentiment analysis. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 4367–4377. Ali Farhadi, Joseph Redmon, and 1 others. 2018. Yolov3: An incremental improvement. In In Proceed-ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 1–6. Manuel Faysse, Hugues Sibille, Tony Wu, Bilel Om-rani, Gautier Viaud, Céline Hudelot, and Pierre Colombo. 2024. Colpali: Efficient document re-trieval with vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01449 .Tsu-Jui Fu, William Yang Wang, Daniel McDuff, and Yale Song. 2022. Doc2ppt: Automatic presentation slides generation from scientific documents. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 36, pages 634–642. Jiaxin Ge, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Xuhui Zhou, Yi-Hao Peng, Sanjay Subramanian, Qinyue Tan, Maarten Sap, Alane Suhr, Daniel Fried, Graham Neubig, and 1 others. 2025. Autopresent: Designing structured visuals from scratch. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 2902–2911. Keshav Kumar and Ravindranath Chowdary. 2024. Slidespawn: An automatic slides generation sys-tem for research publications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.17719 .Wenhui Liao, Jiapeng Wang, Hongliang Li, Chengyu Wang, Jun Huang, and Lianwen Jin. 2025. Do-clayllm: An efficient multi-modal extension of large language models for text-rich document understand-ing. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 4038–4049. Nikolaos Livathinos, Christoph Auer, Maksym Lysak, Ahmed Nassar, Michele Dolfi, Panos Vagenas, Ce-sar Berrospi Ramis, Matteo Omenetti, Kasper Dinkla, Yusik Kim, and 1 others. 2025. Docling: An efficient open-source toolkit for ai-driven document conver-sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17887 .Boammani Aser Lompo and Marc Haraoui. 2025. Visual-tableqa: Open-domain benchmark for rea-soning over table images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07966 .Lin Long, Rui Wang, Ruixuan Xiao, Junbo Zhao, Xiao Ding, Gang Chen, and Haobo Wang. 2024. On llms-driven synthetic data generation, curation, and evalu-ation: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15126 .Ahmed Masry, Megh Thakkar, Aayush Bajaj, Aaryaman Kartha, Enamul Hoque, and Shafiq Joty. 2025. Chart-gemma: Visual instruction-tuning for chart reasoning in the wild. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics: Industry Track , pages 625–643. Ishani Mondal, S Shwetha, Anandhavelu Natarajan, Aparna Garimella, Sambaran Bandyopadhyay, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. 2024. Presentations by the hu-mans and for the humans: Harnessing llms for gen-erating persona-aware slides from documents. In 

Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2664–2684. Linke Ouyang, Yuan Qu, Hongbin Zhou, Jiawei Zhu, Rui Zhang, Qunshu Lin, Bin Wang, Zhiyuan Zhao, Man Jiang, Xiaomeng Zhao, and 1 others. 2025. Om-nidocbench: Benchmarking diverse pdf document parsing with comprehensive annotations. In Proceed-ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 24838–24848. Wei Pang, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Xiangru Jian, Xi He, and Philip Torr. 2025. Paper2poster: Towards mul-timodal poster automation from scientific papers. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21497 .Libo Qin, Qiguang Chen, Xiachong Feng, Yang Wu, Yongheng Zhang, Yinghui Li, Min Li, Wanxiang Che, and Philip S Yu. 2026. Large language models meet nlp: A survey. Frontiers of Computer Science ,20(11):2011361. Libo Qin, Zhouyang Li, Wanxiang Che, Minheng Ni, and Ting Liu. 2021. Co-gat: A co-interactive graph attention network for joint dialog act recognition and sentiment classification. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 35, pages 13709–13717. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36:68539–68551. Zejiang Shen, Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Bailey Kuehl, Daniel S Weld, and Doug Downey. 2022. Vila: Im-proving structured content extraction from scientific pdfs using visual layout groups. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:376– 392. Jinwei Su, Yinghui Xia, Qizhen Lan, Xinyuan Song, Yang Jingsong, Lewei He, and Tianyu Shi. 2025. Difficulty-aware agent orchestration in llm-powered workflows. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2509. Abhigya Verma, Sriram Puttagunta, Seganrasan Sub-ramanian, and Sravan Ramachandran. 2025. Graft: Graph and table reasoning for textual alignment–a benchmark for structured instruction following and visual reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15690 .Zhensheng Wang, Wenmian Yang, Kun Zhou, Yiquan Zhang, and Weijia Jia. 2025. Retqa: A large-scale open-domain tabular question answering dataset for real estate sector. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 25452–25460. Jeremy Warner, Amy Pavel, Tonya Nguyen, Maneesh Agrawala, and Bjoern Hartmann. 2023. Slidespecs: Automatic and interactive presentation feedback col-lation. In Proceedings of the 28th International Con-ference on Intelligent User Interfaces , pages 695– 709. Yuheng Yang, Wenjia Jiang, Yang Wang, Yiwei Wang, and Chi Zhang. 2025. Auto-slides: An inter-active multi-agent system for creating and cus-tomizing research presentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.11062 .Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Kevin Lin, Ehsan Azarnasab, Faisal Ahmed, Zicheng Liu, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, and Lijuan Wang. 2023. Mm-react: Prompting chatgpt for multimodal reasoning and action. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11381 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations .Murong Yue, Wenlin Yao, Haitao Mi, Dian Yu, Ziyu Yao, and Dong Yu. 2024. Dots: Learning to reason dynamically in llms via optimal reasoning trajectories search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03864 .Zhuosheng Zhang, Kehai Chen, Rui Wang, Masao Utiyama, Eiichiro Sumita, Zuchao Li, and Hai Zhao. 2023. Universal multimodal representation for lan-guage understanding. IEEE Transactions on Pat-tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 45(7):9169– 9185. Hao Zheng, Xinyan Guan, Hao Kong, Wenkai Zhang, Jia Zheng, Weixiang Zhou, Hongyu Lin, Yaojie Lu, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. 2025. Pptagent: Gen-erating and evaluating presentations beyond text-to-slides. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 14413–14429. 

A Dataset Construction 

A.1 Translation Protocol 

Since the original slide templates and data schema were derived from the Chinese real estate market, all textual elements were initially in Chinese. We employed a three-step translation protocol to con-vert them into English: 

Template Content Translation. We translated all static text in titles, captions, and summaries from Chinese to English, while preserving dynamic placeholder variables. 

Database Schema and Dictionary Adaptation. 

We translated database schema names (table and column names) into English. For the Header Alias Dictionary, we curated diverse English synonyms for each metric (e.g., ’Avg Price’, ’Unit Cost’, ’Av-erage Value’ for the same price field), enabling linguistic variety in the final slides. The Field Map-ping Dictionary was updated to link English tem-plate variables to database fields. 

Terminology Verification. Domain experts re-viewed all translated assets to ensure technical terms matched professional English standards in real estate. 

A.2 Data Field Descriptions 

The detailed schema of the real-estate database used in this study is presented in Table 3. This dataset compiles residential transaction records from major Chinese cities across both new and re-sale housing markets. Each entry contains nine key attributes that jointly encode spatial location (e.g., city, block), temporal information, and core transac-tion metrics (e.g., volume, floor area, price). These fields constitute the essential data backbone that underpins the statistical analyses and automated reporting workflows presented in the main text. 

A.3 Template Specification 

To ensure reproducibility and facilitate fine-grained evaluation, we provide the full specification of our template system in Table 12. This table enumerates the 34 atomic sub-templates across all identified business themes. Each entry explicitly defines the four core elements required for slide generation: (1) a set of Title Templates that introduce the ana-lytical perspective; (2) a specific Statistical Func-tion (Fk) that drives data retrieval and aggregation; (3) Caption Templates that define the scope of tables/charts; and (4) Summary Templates that synthesize quantitative insights into natural lan-guage. All templates utilize variable placehold-ers (e.g., City , Start_Year ) denoted in monospace .These variables are automatically populated dur-ing generation using the real-estate market variable definitions provided in Table 9, ensuring semantic consistency across all slide elements. 

A.4 Template Design 

In professional real-estate presentations, slides typ-ically consist of several key elements: titles, body text, tables, charts, images, and summary state-ments. For the slide auto-update task, we focus specifically on four core element types—Title, Ta-ble, Chart, and Summary—for two reasons: (1) they are the most frequently updated in real-world reporting workflows; (2) together they cover all Table 3: Description of fields in the real-estate database.                               

> Field Name Data Type Definition Example
> city String Name of the target city. Beijing, Shanghai block String Name of the administrative district or sub-region. Chaoyang District project String Name of the residential project or community. Oceanwide Elite Estate date_code String Temporal identifier. 2024-05-01 supply_sets Integer Volume of new housing units listed for sale. 1trade_sets Integer Volume of housing units sold/transacted. 1dim_area Float Floor area ( m2). 125.5 dim_price Float Total price (15.2k CNY). 15.2 dim_unit_price Float Price per square meter (CNY/ m2). 68000.0

principal content modalities (text, tabular data, visual analytics). Building on thorough domain analysis, we identify six recurring business anal-ysis themes (see Appendix A.3), such as Cross-Structure Analysis of Resale-House Transactions 

and Analysis of Neighborhood Price Trends . For each theme Mi, we define a prototype slide com-posed of 2–7 configurable sub-templates Tj , yield-ing a total of 34 distinct sub-templates tailored to common real-estate analytic scenarios. These 34 sub-templates serve as the atomic layout units that we later use to build source slides and to de-fine train/validation/test splits. The design logic for Title, Table, Chart, and Summary templates is detailed below. 

A.4.1 Title template design 

Titles in presentations serve as both guides and in-dices, directly exposing the statistical methodology and analytical perspective employed on each slide. For example, the title “Cross-Analysis of New Housing Transaction Structure” signals that the slide presents multi-dimensional cross-tabulated statistics. In designing the Title i template suite, we created three title templates for each analyti-cal theme (18 in total; see Appendix A.3). During source slide generation, for each sub-template Tj

within theme Mi, the system randomly assigns one of the three corresponding title templates. This random assignment introduces lexical and stylistic variation while preserving the underlying analytical intent of each sub-template. 

A.4.2 Table template design 

Tables consist of a caption and a data body. In prac-tical business analytics, the table caption typically specifies the analysis topic and data scope (e.g., location and time period in real-estate contexts), while the table body presents not raw data directly, but aggregated and statistically summarized results. For example, a real-estate company typically shows monthly or quarterly sales summaries across re-gions, rather than transaction records for each in-dividual building. Therefore, for each theme’s par-ticular statistical analysis requirements, we collab-orate with real-estate domain experts to define the core statistical logic. For each theme Mi, we de-sign 1–3 specific analytical dimensions and define 11 distinct statistical functions Fk. Each statisti-cal function Fk corresponds one-to-one to a spe-cific table template. Intuitively, SQL k (defined below) specifies what subset of records to retrieve, while Fk encodes how to aggregate and summarize 

the retrieved data. During source slide generation, each sub-template Tj within theme Mi randomly samples a statistical function Fk from the theme’s function set, applies it to generate results, and ren-ders the output using the corresponding table body template. 

Caption generation. We construct “caption + ta-ble body” generation templates based on these sta-tistical functions. The caption explicitly specifies the analytic scope and context of the table (e.g., temporal span or geographic region). We adopt variable-based templates and, for each statistical function, we design three caption templates Cp (33 in total). As illustrated in Figure 1, each caption template combines fixed text (in black) with vari-able placeholders (in color). To instantiate these templates, we construct a Field Mapping Dictio-nary (released with the dataset; see Table 6) that links template-level variables to concrete database fields. During the instantiation process, the system queries this dictionary to resolve all placeholders. By retrieving the corresponding concrete values (e.g., “Beijing”) from the database, it transforms the abstract template into a final caption with ex-plicit business semantics. 

Table body generation. The table body is pri-marily responsible for presenting core data derived from aggregation and statistical analysis. Struc-turally, the table body template is composed of an SQL query template SQL k paired with a func-tion template Fk, corresponding to the two pri-mary generation stages: data retrieval and statis-tical computation. First, to ensure the table con-tent aligns strictly with the caption’s scope, we leverage shared variables: we populate the SQL query template SQL k using the same variables resolved via the Field Mapping Dictionary dur-ing caption instantiation, thereby retrieving pre-cise raw data. Subsequently, the system config-ures the computation logic by querying the Pa-rameter Candidate Dictionary (released with the dataset; see Table 7) to randomly sample function-specific parameters (e.g., step sizes for binning) for 

Fk. In parallel, we specifically decouple header generation to introduce linguistic diversity. The system accesses the Header Alias Dictionary 

(released with the dataset; see Table 8)—which maps standard metrics to multiple synonymous variants—and randomly selects distinct aliases for both column and row headers. This mechanism ensures that tables presenting the same underlying data logic can exhibit varied terminological expres-sions. Finally, the system passes these configu-ration inputs—structural parameters and selected headers—alongside the retrieved raw data into Fk

to generate the final table body. 

Canonical table structures. For table presenta-tion formats, we organize all computed results into three canonical table structures, each correspond-ing to distinct analytic perspectives: • Field-constraint type: rows correspond to statistical fields/metrics (e.g., average price, supply, sales), while columns correspond to a single constraint dimension (e.g., year or area bin), supporting multi-metric comparison under aligned conditions. • Constraint-field type: rows correspond to constraint values, while columns correspond to statistical fields/metrics, suitable when the number of metrics is small and the focus is comparison across constraint values. • Cross-constraint type: both rows and columns encode different constraints, with cell values reflecting their intersections; this structure most strongly tests system capability for understanding compound constraints. These three canonical structures(see Figure 4) allow us to systematically probe models’ ability to interpret tables with simple constraints (Field-constraint and Constraint-field) and more complex, compositional constraints (Cross-constraint). 

A.4.3 Chart template design 

Charts are treated not as independent content units, but as visual projections of the same structured data used in tables. This approach allows for diverse presentation formats of the same under-lying dataset. Consequently, the design process for chart templates mirrors that of table templates (Section 3.2.2), strictly adhering to the principle of “homologous data, heterogeneous presentation.” Specifically, we reuse the statistical functions Fk

and SQL retrieval logic originally defined for ta-bles to obtain the underlying data. We then leverage chart rendering tools to render this data according to the specified chart type. In the current release, we support bar and line charts, which cover the predominant chart types observed in our real-world reference reports. 

A.4.4 Summary template design 

The Summary synthesizes complex data into tex-tual insights. Analyzing real-world reports re-veals that summaries typically use stable phrasing structures with dynamically injected data conclu-sions. To automate this, we implemented dedicated insight-extraction logic for each of the 11 statisti-cal functions. For each function, we automatically compute a set of key metrics (e.g., trends, growth rates, peak values)—typically 2–4 core metrics per function—from the computed table data. We then designed 3 distinct summary templates Summary q

for each function (33 in total) to ensure expres-sive diversity. Similar to caption and table body generation, summary templates are instantiated by leveraging the Field Mapping Dictionary to resolve variable placeholders (e.g., resolving city to “Bei-jing”), ensuring consistent data context across all three slide components. Across all business themes, these templates collectively cover approximately 30–40 distinct business indicator types (e.g., month-on-month growth in average price, distribution of unit prices across area bins; see Table 9). Crucially, this unified approach guarantees semantic consis-tency across titles, tables, charts, and summaries, Fields-Constraints                                                                              

> (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f)
> Constraints-Fields Cross-Constraints
> Assets
> Sales Count
> 0-20m² 17
> 20-40m² 6
> 40-60m² 24
> 60-80m² 39
> 80-100m² 127
> 100-120m² 48
> 120-140m² 55
> 140-160m² 21
> ≥160m² 30
> Assets
> 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
> Sales Count 175 174 187 233 268
> /m² Sales 19,341 19,565 16,652 16,052 13,881
> Total Area 16,959 16,907 18,225 21,676 26,431
> Assets
> 2.0-3.0 M 3.0-4.0 M ... 11.0-12.0 M ≥12.0 M
> 40-60m² 10000
> 60-80m² 54 1000
> 80-100m² 147 17 500
> ... 238 72 10 10
> 140-160m² 0940 30 13
> 160-180m² 3627 25 15
> 180-200m² 0310 16 16
> ≥200m² 024 138 167 107

Figure 4: Illustration of three canonical table structures: Field-constraint, Constraint-field, and Cross-constraint. 

which is essential for the dynamic update task we target. 

A.5 Source slide generation 

To support systematic template instantiation and slide generation, we develop EasySlide , a toolkit built on python-pptx (see Table 10). EasySlide provides simplified interfaces for common slide op-erations such as adding titles, inserting tables, and rendering charts, improving code maintainability and enabling efficient batch generation. The source slide generation process proceeds through four key steps: • Template instantiation: The system selects a sub-template based on the business theme and populates placeholders (e.g., city ) with concrete parameters to generate specific titles and captions. • Data generation: Using these parameters, the system executes SQL queries to retrieve raw data, which is then processed by statistical functions to compute table values and extract key insights for summaries. • Content rendering: The EasySlide toolkit ren-ders the generated titles, tables, charts, and textual summaries onto slides based on the computed data, ensuring consistency in layout and style. • Metadata annotation: For each slide, aYAML file is generated recording two essen-tial components: slide f ilters captures the data pipeline (database tables, SQL templates, statistical functions, filter parameters), while 

template slide documents the slide layout (el-ement types, positions, and content roles). To-gether, these structured annotations provide precise grounding for subsequent dynamic content updates. We release these YAML files alongside the slide decks, so that future work can directly leverage the structured annotations for training, evaluation, and tool-based execution. This systematic process yields 7,685 distinct source slides as the foundation for our dataset. 

A.6 User Instruction and Target Slide Generation 

Based on the source slides, we further generate user instructions and target slides to construct com-plete instruction–execution triples. Each triple con-sists of a source slide , a user instruction , and a 

target slide . All triples share the same external Post-greSQL database described in Section 3.1, which serves as the underlying data source for both slide generation and instruction execution. We design two typical update scenarios based on the metadata of source slides (such as data filtering conditions and statistical function configurations): 1. Basic Replacement Instructions: Update only core variables (e.g., temporal spans, ge-ographic regions) while maintaining the sta-tistical functions and analytical dimensions. For example: Generate an analysis of {city} {block} from {start year} to {end year}.” 2. Customized-Parameter Instructions: Fur-ther modify constraint parameters (e.g., area segmentation, price granularity), triggering cascading updates across data queries and sta-tistical computations. For example: Change the area segmentation to area range and price granularity to price range.” To support the diversity of these two scenarios, we construct approximately 24 instruction templates. To flexibly accommodate different parameter com-binations, we introduce an instruction variable dic-tionary, stored as query_filters in the YAML metadata, that records the variables to be modified in the instruction and their new values. After instan-tiation, we employ Qwen3-80B to paraphrase the generated instructions, ensuring linguistic diversity and naturalness. To ensure one-to-one correspon-dence among source slides, user instructions, target slides, and metadata, we design the following three-step process: 

Instruction sampling and filling. For each source slide, the system randomly selects an in-struction template. Based on the parameter dictio-nary, the system randomly samples new parameter values (such as new geographic regions or statisti-cal configurations), fills them into placeholders to generate a natural language instruction, and records the same new values in query_filters to keep the instruction text and executable parameters synchro-nized. 

Data querying and recomputation. The system merges slide_filters (the original data query configuration from the source slide’s YAML file) with query_filters (parameter changes from the instruction) to generate update_filters . Ac-cording to update_filters , it then executes SQL queries to retrieve updated data and recomputes tables, charts, and textual insights in a single, con-sistent update pipeline. 

Rendering and metadata recording. Using the EasySlide toolkit, the system renders the updated tables, charts, and textual summaries onto new slides. During this process, the system strictly pre-serves the layout, color scheme, and typography of the source slide to ensure continuity of user ex-perience. Simultaneously, the system generates a corresponding YAML metadata file for the target slide, containing query_filters (instruction pa-rameters), update_filters (merged filtering con-ditions), and output_slide (target slide informa-tion), forming a complete, traceable record. To-gether, the source slide, user instruction, target slide, shared PostgreSQL database, and associated YAML metadata form a fully specified instruc-tion–execution instance. 

A.7 Dataset Statistics 

DynaSlide contains 20,036 instruction–execution samples, each represented as a triple (( source slide ,

user instruction , target slide )). Crucially, all sam-ples are grounded in the shared structured database of real-estate transaction records described in Sec-tion 3.1, which provides the external data context for both slide generation and instruction execution. We split the dataset into train/validation/test sets with a 6:2:2 ratio (12,022 / 4,007 / 4,007) and en-force zero overlap of sub-templates (T_j) across splits to evaluate generalization to unseen layouts. The dataset covers six analytical themes, 11 statis-tical functions, and two instruction scenarios (basic variable replacement vs. parameter customization). Each sample is accompanied by structured YAML metadata and executable data dependencies (e.g., SQL templates and function parameters), enabling both end-to-end and component-level evaluation. Table 11 provides detailed statistics. We release (i) all source and target slide decks in PPTX format, (ii) a PostgreSQL database dump of the underlying transaction records, and (iii) YAML metadata files and template dictionaries (Field Mapping, Parame-ter Candidates, and Header Aliases), together with the EasySlide toolkit configuration. This complete release supports reproducible research on dynamic slide update and facilitates future model develop-ment, ablation studies, and fine-grained evaluation. 

B Method Implementation Details 

B.1 Prompts Used in SlideAgent 

This section summarizes all prompts employed within the SlideAgent framework. In the Slide Parsing and Representation stage, the Multimodal Layout Parsing module utilizes a structured prompt (Figure 5) to guide the VLM in predicting semantic labels and bounding boxes. For 

Logic Extraction , we use distinct prompts based on the sub-task: the Data Source Extraction module employs a schema-aligned slot-filling prompt (Fig-ure 6) to ground slide elements to database fields. The Function Logic Extraction module uses two separate prompts: a function-calling prompt for the closed-domain scenario (Figure 7) to identify predefined statistical functions, and a generic de-composition prompt for the open-domain scenario (Figure 8) to reconstruct aggregation logic from atomic components. In the Instruction-Driven Update stage, the User Instruction Parsing module uses a state-update prompt (Figure 9) to modify the parameter state based on user input while preserving the JSON schema. Subsequently, the SQL Generation mod-ule employs a structured prompt (Figure 10) to convert these updated parameters into executable database queries. Finally, the Summary Update module utilizes a fact-aware rewriting prompt (Fig-ure 11), which takes the original summary and pre/post-update data as input to generate factually consistent textual insights. 

B.2 Details of Structured Slide Representation 

We define the structured representation of a slide as a list of element objects, blending VLM semantic predictions with precise attributes from the PPTX file. Specifically, each element object contains the following fields: Each element is represented by five fields: id , a unique identifier within the slide; type , the underlying PPTX shape type (e.g., 

textBox ); role , the semantic label predicted by the VLM and confirmed via IoU matching (e.g., 

caption , title ); text , the textual content; and 

layout , the geometric attributes from PPTX meta-data, including x, y, width , and height .

B.3 Algorithm for Open-Domain Logic Reconstruction 

The process of the synthesize analytical table in-terface is outlined in Algorithm 1. Instead of hard-coding logic for diverse table types, we formulate table generation as a unified Split–Apply–Combine 

workflow. The system first slices raw data based on constraints, groups records by row and column headers, applies the target aggregation function, and finally reshapes the output into the target lay-out.                                                        

> Symbol Definition
> DRaw data set retrieved from the database, con-sisting of Nrecords {r1, . . . , r N}.
> LThe logic specification tuple: L=(S, H, C, F, O ).
> SStructure Type . Determines the matrix layout strategy.
> •FC (Field-Constraint): Metrics as rows, con-straints (e.g., time) as columns.
> •CF (Constraint-Field): Constraints as rows, metrics as columns.
> •XC (Cross-Constraint): Intersection of two constraints (e.g., City ×Year).
> HHeaders .H= ( Hrow , H col ). Defines the grouping keys for rows and columns.
> CConstraint Spec . A 5-element list specifying slicing logic and formatting:
> C= [ k, T, v start , v end , v step ].
> •k:Constraint Type (e.g., "year" or
> "price" ).
> •T:Parameterized Template for dynamic formatting (e.g., "-M" or "-" ).
> •vstart , v end :Boundary Values defining the closed interval (e.g., "2020", "2023" ).
> •vstep :Parameter Interval or step size (e.g.,
> "1" or "price_range_size" ).
> FSource Fields . The database columns to be aggregated (e.g., sales_vol ).
> OOperations .The aggregation functions ap-plied to F(e.g., S UM ,COUNT ).

Table 4: Unified Notation for Logic Reconstruction Components. 

C Additional Experiments 

C.1 Experimental Setup Details 

We employ few-shot prompting with task-specific demonstrations (typically 6–8 examples) and deter-ministic decoding (temperature=0.0) to ensure re-producibility. The system integrates python-pptx 

(v0.6.21) for slide manipulation and PostgreSQL (v14.5) for data management, orchestrated via LangGraph (v0.6.4). All experiments are con-ducted on NVIDIA H100 GPUs using the vLLM framework for high-throughput inference. 

C.2 Supplementary Generalization Evidence 

We conduct two additional experiments to as-sess generalization. First, since evaluating closed-source models on the full benchmark is pro-hibitively expensive, we compare open-weight and closed-source models on 500 randomly sam-pled cases from the template-generated test set. Closed-source models significantly outperform Algorithm 1 Generic Logic Reconstruction Pipeline 

Require: Raw Data D; Logic Tuple L = ( S, H, C, F, O )

defined in Table 4. 1: // Step 1: Constraint Application (Split) 

2: if T indicates Range Binning (e.g., "-" or "-M" ) then 

3: {Apply binning with boundaries [vstart , v end ] and step vstep }4: D′ ← ApplyBinning (D, field = k, start =

vstart , end = vend , step = vstep , fmt = T )

5: else 

6: {Case: Standard Filtering (e.g., k = City , vstart =

"Beijing")} 7: D′ ← { r ∈ D | ApplyFilter (r[k], op = T, val =

vstart )}

8: end if 

9: // Step 2: Determine Grouping Keys 

10: Initialize grouping set G ← ∅ 

11: if S = XC then 

12: G ← Hrow ∪ Hcol 

13: else if S = CF then 

14: G ← Hrow 

15: else if S = FC then 

16: G ← Hcol 

17: end if 

18: // Step 3: Aggregation (Apply) 

19: A ← GroupBy (D′, G ).Aggregate (F, O )

20: Note: A contains grouping columns G and computed metric columns. 

21: // Step 4: Layout Reshaping (Combine) 

22: if S = XC then 

23: {Pivot: Map Hrow to index, Hcol to columns, using the first metric} 24: Tout ← PivotTable (A, index = Hrow , columns =

Hcol , values = Col (F, O )) 

25: else if S = FC then 

26: Tout ← A⊤ {Transpose: Flip metrics to rows to match template} 27: else 

28: Tout ← A {Standard layout, no reshape needed} 29: end if 

30: return Tout 

open-weight ones, with GPT-5.4 achieving the highest task success rate at 78.01% / 76.66% under the closed/open settings, followed by Qwen-MAX at 75.43% / 72.20%. Among open-weight mod-els, the ranking remains unchanged: GPT-OSS-120B remains the strongest at 67.50% / 63.47%, slightly outperforming Qwen3-80B at 66.18% / 60.82%. These results further support that end-to-end slide updating is highly capability-dependent, with stronger models consistently achieving better performance. Second, we compare model perfor-mance on human-authored slides (see Section A.7) against the same 500 templated cases. Trends re-main similar: GPT-OSS-120B achieves 67.71% / 61.46% and Qwen3-14B achieves 33.33% / 25.00% under the closed/open settings, preserving the same open-weight ranking as the benchmark test set. This consistency supports our assumption that re-                                 

> (A) 500 template-generated (B) Human-authored Model Closed Open Closed Open
> GPT-OSS-120B 67.50 63.47 67.71 61.46 GPT-OSS-20B 46.80 35.66 45.83 35.42 Qwen3-80B 66.18 60.82 64.58 59.38 Qwen3-30B 50.24 43.58 48.96 41.67 Qwen3-14B 35.71 27.34 33.33 25.00 Qwen-MAX 75.43 72.20 73.96 69.79 GPT-5.4 78.01 76.66 77.08 75.00

Table 5: Supplementary generalization results (task suc-cess rate%). 

port slide updates are primarily layout-preserving edits on element contents, suggesting our bench-mark measures generalizable slide-updating capa-bility rather than template-specific matching. 

C.3 Case Study 

We observe two representative failure modes in SlideAgent. The first is error accumulation: once an upstream module makes a mistake in slide pars-ing, instruction grounding, SQL generation, or tool execution, the error propagates through later stages and eventually leads to inconsistency among tables, charts, and textual conclusions. In this sense, a lo-cal mistake rarely remains local; it instead distorts the entire update chain. The second is the low pre-cision of Summary Update: even when the preced-ing structured steps are correct, the final summary may still fail to express the updated results with sufficient numerical and semantic fidelity. This weakness reflects both the intrinsic difficulty of fact-aware text generation and the strictness of our evaluation criterion. We therefore use exact match for summary rewriting to enforce semantic and nu-merical correctness. For example, if second-hand housing sales in Liangxiang, Beijing increase from 836 to 1,355, the correct increase is about 62.1%; a rewritten summary reporting 63.2% is still counted as incorrect. These two failure modes show that the main challenge lies not only in executing each module correctly, but also in maintaining precise cross-module consistency through to the final nar-rative. Template Variable Source Column Description 

start_year date_code Extracted year from the start date of the analysis period (e.g., 2023). 

end_year date_code Extracted year from the end date of the analysis period (e.g., 2024). 

month date_code Truncated to month-level precision to represent the specific reference month (e.g., 2024-01). 

city city Direct mapping to the target city. 

block block Direct mapping to the administrative block. 

project project Direct mapping to the residential project. 

Table 6: Field Mapping Dictionary . This dictionary defines how template-level variables are derived from concrete database columns. 

Parameter Variable Candidate Value Set Description 

area_bin_step {10, 15, 20, 25, 30} Sets the interval width ( m2) for grouping properties by floor area. 

price_bin_step {0.75, 1.0, 1.5, 1.75, 2.0} Sets the interval width (Million CNY) for grouping properties by total price. 

Table 7: Parameter Candidate Dictionary . This dictionary defines the valid search space for parameters variable used in statistical functions ( Fk). 

Header Alias Variants (Professional Selection) Description 

supply volume {Supply Volume, New Listings, Listing Count, Market Supply, Total Listings, Supply (Units), New Supply} Number of residential units listed for sale. 

trade volume {Trade Volume, Sales Volume, Transaction Count, Units Sold, Deal Count, Total Sales, Turnover Vol-ume} Number of residential units sold. 

area range counts {Volume by Area, Sales by Size, Count by Area, Area Segment Volume, Units by Size, Size Distribution} Transaction count grouped by floor area seg-ments. 

price range counts {Volume by Price, Sales by Price, Count by Price, Price Segment Volume, Units by Price, Price Distribution} Transaction count grouped by total price in-tervals. 

total supply area {Total Supply Area, Supply Floor Area, Total Listing Area, Aggregate Supply ( m2), Supply Size, Listed Area} Aggregate floor area of listed properties. 

total trade area {Total Trade Area, Total Sales Area, Transaction Area, Sold Floor Area, Aggregate Sales ( m2), Sold Area} Aggregate floor area of sold properties. 

avg price {Avg. Total Price, Avg. House Price, Mean Transac-tion Price, Avg. Unit Cost, Per-Unit Price, Avg. Deal Price} Average price per housing unit (not per sqm). 

unit price {Unit Price, Price per m2, Avg. Price ( /m 2), Sqm Price, Transaction Price ( /m 2), Market Rate} Average price per square meter. 

area_range {Area Range, Floor Area ( m2), Size Band, Property Size, Area Segment, Unit Size} Grouping dimension for floor area intervals. 

price_range {Price Range, Total Price (Band), Price Segment, Value Tier, Budget Range, Price Bracket} Grouping dimension for total price intervals. 

Table 8: Header Alias Dictionary . This dictionary defines synonymous aliases for column and row headers across different statistical analyses. Multiple variants of the same metric enable linguistic diversity in table presentations. Table 9: Definitions of real-estate market analysis variables. All variables are automatically calculated from the transaction database. 

Variable Name Description 

City Name of the target city for analysis (e.g., Beijing). 

Block Name of the specific residential block or sub-district. 

Start_Year The starting year of the analysis period (e.g., 2020). 

End_Year The ending year of the analysis period (e.g., 2024). 

Start_Month The starting month for monthly trend analysis. 

End_Month The ending month for monthly trend analysis. 

Seg_SupplyDemand_Core_Area Core demand area segment: floor area range where primary housing demand is most concentrated, indicating the core supply–demand space. 

Seg_SupplyDemand_Upgrade_Area Upgrade demand area segment: floor area range for improved-living demand, indicating the upgraded housing segment. 

Total_Transaction_Units Total transaction units during the observed period, reflecting overall market activity. 

Modal_Price_Segment Dominant transaction price range with the highest volume, representing the prevailing market price level. 

Modal_Area_Segment Dominant transaction area range with the highest volume, indicating mainstream housing size preferences. 

Peak_Segment_Volume Peak cell transaction volume in the price–area matrix, highlighting the most popular specific product subtype. 

Dominant_Area_Segment Label of the area segment with the highest transaction concentration (e.g., 80–100 m2). 

Dominant_Area_Segment_Volume Total transaction volume within the dominant area segment. 

Dominant_Price_Segment Label of the price segment with the highest transaction concentration. 

Dominant_Price_Segment_Volume Total transaction volume within the dominant price segment. 

Base_Period_Traded_Area Total annual traded area (m 2) in the base year. 

Terminal_Period_Traded_Area Total annual traded area (m 2) in the terminal year. 

Base_Period_Avg_Price Average transaction price (CNY/m 2) in the base year. 

Terminal_Period_Avg_Price Average transaction price (CNY/m 2) in the terminal year. 

Total_Area_Change_Pct Percentage change of total traded area from base to terminal year (e.g., 0.25 = 25%), indicating market expansion or contraction. 

Total_Price_Change_Pct Percentage change in average transaction price from base to terminal year. 

Area_Trend_Direction Direction of traded area trend: “Increasing” or “Decreasing”. 

Price_Trend_Direction Direction of price trend: “Increasing” or “Decreasing”. 

Absolute_Price_Change Absolute price change (CNY/m 2) between terminal and base periods. 

Supply_Trend_Direction Direction of supply trend: “Increasing” or “Decreasing”. 

Transaction_Trend_Direction Direction of transaction volume trend: “Increasing” or “Decreasing”. 

Base_Period_Supply_Units Total number of supplied units in the base year. 

Terminal_Period_Supply_Units Total number of supplied units in the terminal year. 

Base_Period_Transaction_Units Total transaction units in the base year. 

Terminal_Period_Transaction_Units Total transaction units in the terminal year. 

Total_Supply_Change_Pct Percentage change in supply volume between base and terminal years. 

Total_Transaction_Change_Pct Percentage change in total transactions between base and terminal years. 

Transaction_Change_Units Absolute change in transaction units (terminal minus base). 

Base_Period_Transaction_Price Transaction price level in the base year. 

Terminal_Period_Transaction_Price Transaction price level in the terminal year. 

Transaction_Change_Price Absolute change in transaction price between base and terminal periods. Function Description 

create_slide Initializes a new slide page within the presentation deck. This function acts as the container for subsequent elements, allowing users to specify an optional slide layout template (e.g., title-only, blank). 

add_title Adds a prominent title element to the current slide context. This is typically used to define the primary topic or section header for the slide. 

add_text Inserts a text box containing specified content at given coordinates. This function supports multi-line text, bullet points, and basic rich text formatting for detailed descriptions. 

add_table Renders a structured data table on the slide. The function automatically calculates and adjusts cell dimensions (row heights and column widths) to fit the provided dataset visually. 

add_line_chart Generates a line chart visualization to display trends over time or continuous variables. It supports plotting multiple data series for comparative analysis. 

add_bar_chart Creates a bar chart to compare quantitative values across distinct categories. Users can specify orientation (vertical or horizontal) to best fit the data distribution. 

Table 10: Description of core functions for slide generation. 

Category Dimension Quantity Dataset Splits 

Total Samples 20,036 Train Set 12,022 Validation Set 4,007 Test Set 4,007 

Template Statistics 

Analysis Themes 6Statistical Operations 11 Template Types 34 Avg. Elements per Slide 4.2 Source Slides (Seeds) 7,685 

Instruction Statistics 

Basic Instructions 13,016 Customized Instructions 7,020 Avg. Instruction Length 20.11 Avg. Parameters per Instruction 3.8 

Annotation Components 

Natural Language Instructions 20,036 Slide Titles and Captions 45,854 SQL Queries 20,036 Summaries 20,036 Statistical Tables (Total) 25,041 Base Table 4,919 Line Chart Table 9,746 Bar Chart Table 10,376 

Table 11: Detailed statistics of the DynaSlide dataset. The dataset, derived from 7,685 source slides , covers four core elements (titles, tables, charts, summaries) and includes full annotations for SQL, logic, and visual layouts. Table 12: Full Template Specification for Real-Estate Market Text Generation. Variables are denoted in monospace 

and are automatically populated during generation. 

Title Template Function Caption Template Summary Template 

1. Block Area Segment Distri-bution 2. Analysis of Block Area Division 3. Distribution of Block Area Segments Supply-Transaction Unit Statistics 1. Start_Year -End_Year Supply and Transaction Unit Statistics in City ’s Block 

2. City Block : Supply & Sales Volume Analysis, Start_Year -

> End_Year

3. Analysis of Property Units Supplied vs. Sold in City ’s  

> Block

(Start_Year -End_Year )1. From Start_Year to End_Year , Block ’s core supply-demand area was Seg_Su pplyDemand_Core_Area m2, with the upgrade-oriented segment centered on  

> Seg_SupplyDemand_Upgrade_Area

m2.2. Between Start_Year and End_Ye ar , the market structure in Block was defined by a core demand range of  

> Seg_SupplyDemand_Core_Area

m2 and an upgrade tier of Seg_SupplyDemand_Upgra de_Area m2.3. The Block sector exhibited a dual-tier segmentation from Start_Year -

> End_Year

: a primary volume cluster at Seg_SupplyDemand_Core_Area m2

and a secondary upgrade cluster at  

> Seg_SupplyDemand_Upgrade_Area

m2.

Continued on next page... Table 12 – continued from previous page Title Template Function Caption Template Summary Template 

1. New-House Cross-Structure Anal-ysis 2. New Resi-dential Portfo-lio Composi-tion 3. New Con-struction Inven-tory Structure Analysis Area × Price Cross Pivot 1. Start_Year -End_Year City Block Area and Total Price Cross Statistics 2. Cross-Analysis of Property Size and Price Points in City ’s  

> Block

(Start_Year -End_Year )3. City Block : Correlation between Unit Area and Total Price ( Start_Year -End_Year )1. From Start_Year to End_Year , a total of Total_Transaction_Units units were transacted, with the Modal_Price_Segm ent price segment and Modal_Area_Seg ment area segment having the highest transactions at Peak_Segment_Volume 

units. 2. Out of Total_Transaction_Units 

total transactions during Start_Year -

> End_Year

, the peak velocity of Peak_S egment_Volume units occurred at the intersection of the Modal_Price_Segment 

price band and Modal_Area_Segment area band. 3. The period Start_Year -End_Year 

saw Total_Transaction_Units total sales; the most active cross-segment was Modal_Price_Segment combined with Modal_Area_Segment , contributing  

> Peak_Segment_Volume

units. 1. New-House Cross-Structure Anal-ysis 2. New Resi-dential Portfo-lio Composi-tion 3. New Con-struction Inven-tory Structure Analysis Area Segment Distribution 1. Start_Year -End_Year City Block Total Area Segment Distribution Statistics 2. Distribution of Transactions by Property Size Segment in City ’s Block (Start_Year -

> End_Year

)3. City Block : Analysis of Market Share by Unit Area Brackets ( Start_Year -End_Year )1. Mainstream types concentrate in  

> Dominant_Area_Segment

segments, totaling Dominant_Area_Segment_Volume 

units. 2. A volume of Dominant_Area_Segm ent_Volume units indicates that the  

> Dominant_Area_Segment

range represents the dominant area concentration. 3. The Dominant_Area_Segment typology emerged as the mainstream segment, amassing a total of Dominant_Area_Segm ent_Volume units. 

Continued on next page... Table 12 – continued from previous page Title Template Function Caption Template Summary Template 

1. New-House Cross-Structure Anal-ysis 2. New Resi-dential Portfo-lio Composi-tion 3. New Con-struction Inven-tory Structure Analysis Price Segment Distribution 1. Start_Year -End_Year City Block Total Price Segment Distribution Statistics 2. Distribution of Transactions by Price Point Segment in Ci ty ’s Block (Start_Year -End_Year )3. Sales Breakdown by Price Range Categories for City ’s 

> Block

, Start_Year -End_Year 

1. Mainstream types concentrate in  

> Dominant_Price_Segment

segments, totaling Dominant_Price_Segment_Volume 

units. 2. The Dominant_Price_Segment 

price bracket captured the ma-jority of interest, accumulating  

> Dominant_Price_Segment_Volume

units. 3. With Dominant_Price_Segment_Volume 

units, the Dominant_Price_Segment 

segment constitutes the primary price concentration for the sector. 1. Resale-House Cross-Structure Anal-ysis 2. Resale Resi-dential Portfo-lio Assessment 3. Secondary Market Inven-tory Structure Study Area × Price Cross Pivot 1. Start_Year -End_Year City Block Resale House Area and Total Price Cross Statistics 2. Resale Market: Cross-Analysis of Property Size and Price in City ’s Block 

(Start_Year -End_Year )3. Statistical Profile of Resale Homes by Area vs. Total Price in City ’s Block (Start_Year -

> End_Year

)1. From Start_Year to End_Year , a total of Total_Transaction_Units units were transacted, with the Modal_Price_Segm ent price segment and Modal_Area_Seg ment area segment having the highest transactions at Peak_Segment_Volume 

units. 2. Resale activity for Start_Year -End_ Year totaled Total_Transaction_Units 

units, peaked by Peak_Segment_Volume 

sales in the Modal_Price_Segment / 

> Modal_Area_Segment

cross-segment. 3. The Modal_Price_Segment and Moda l_Area_Segment cohorts led the resale market with Peak_Segment_Volume 

units, driving a cumulative volume of 

> Total_Transaction_Units

.1. Resale-House Cross-Structure Anal-ysis 2. Resale Resi-dential Portfo-lio Assessment 3. Secondary Market Inven-tory Structure Study Area Segment Distribution 1. Start_Year -End_Year City Block Resale House Total Area Segment Distribution Statistics 2. Resale Market Transaction Distribution by Property Size in City ’s Block (Start_Year -

> End_Year

)3. Breakdown of Existing Home Sales by Size Category in City ’s Block , Start_Year -

> End_Year

1. Mainstream types concentrate in the Dominant_Area_Segment segments, totaling Dominant_Area_Segment_Volume 

units. 2. The resale inventory is heavily weighted in the Dominant_Area_Segment 

range, which accounts for Dominant_Are a_Segment_Volume units. 3. Accounting for Dominant_Area_Se gment_Volume units, the Dominant_Are a_Segment category stands out as the primary resale typology. 

Continued on next page... Table 12 – continued from previous page Title Template Function Caption Template Summary Template 

1. Resale-House Cross-Structure Anal-ysis 2. Resale Resi-dential Portfo-lio Assessment 3. Secondary Market Inven-tory Structure Study Price Segment Distribution 1. Start_Year -End_Year City Block Resale House Total Price Segment Distribution Statistics 2. Resale Market Transaction Distribution by Price Point in City ’s Block (Start_Year -

> End_Year

)3. Breakdown of Existing Home Sales by Price Range in City ’s Block , Start_Year -

> End_Year

1. Mainstream types concentrate in the Dominant_Price_Segment segments, totaling Dominant_Price_Segment_Volume 

units. 2. The Dominant_Price_Segment price tier represents the core resale market, comprising Dominant_Price_Segment_Vol ume units. 3. A total of Dominant_Price_Segment_V olume resale units clustered within the  

> Dominant_Price_Segment_Volume

price band. 1. New-House Market Capac-ity Analysis 2. New Con-struction Vol-ume & Supply Capacity 3. Emerging Residential Market Scale Evaluation Historical Capacity Summary 1. City Block Historical Ca-pacity Summary Statistics (Start_Year -End_Year )2. Historical Market Volume Summary for City ’s Block 

(Start_Year -End_Year )3. Summary of Past Market Scale Statistics for City ’s Block ,

> Start_Year

-End_Year 

1. From Start_Year to End_Year , Block ’s traded area Area_Trend_Direction Total_Area_Change_Pct % from Base_P eriod_Traded_Area m2 to Terminal_Per iod_Traded_Area m2, and the average valuation also Price_Trend_Direction Total_Price_Change_Pct % from Base_Per iod_Avg_Price to Terminal_Period_Avg_ Price yuan/m 2.2. Over the Start_Year -End_Year period, the sector saw traded area Area_Trend _Direction by Total_Area_Change_Pct %(moving from Base_Period_Traded_Area 

to Terminal_Period_Traded_Area m2), while valuations Price_Trend_Direction 

by Total_Price_Change_Pct yuan/m 2.3. Starting at Base_Period_Traded_Area 

m2 and Base_Period_Avg_Price yuan/m 2,the market Area_Trend_Direction to  

> Terminal_Period_Traded_Area

m2 and  

> Terminal_Period_Avg_Price

yuan/m 2

respectively, marking a volume shift of Total_Area_Change_Pct % and a price shift of Absolute_Price_Change 

yuan/m 2.

Continued on next page... Table 12 – continued from previous page Title Template Function Caption Template Summary Template 

1. New-House Market Capac-ity Analysis 2. New Con-struction Vol-ume & Supply Capacity 3. Emerging Residential Market Scale Evaluation Annual Supply-Demand Comparison 1. City Block Annual Supply-Demand Comparison Analysis (Start_Year -End_Year )2. City Block : Annual Com-parison of Market Supply and Transaction Volume (Start_Year -End_Year )3. Analysis of Annual Supply-Demand Balance in City ’s 

Block (Start_Year -End_Year )1. From Start_Year to End_Year , new listings in this sector Supply_Trend_Dir ection from Base_Period_Supply_Units 

units to Terminal_Period_Supply_Units 

units (a Supply_Trend_Direction of Tota l_Supply_Change_Pct %), and transaction volume Transaction_Trend_Direction 

from Base_Period_Transaction_Units 

units to Terminal_Period_Transaction_Un its units (a Transaction_Trend_Directio n of Total_Transaction_Change_Pct %). 2. While listings Supply_Trend_Direc tion by Total_Supply_Change_Pct %(reaching Terminal_Period_Supply_Units 

units), transactions simultaneously 

Transaction_Trend_Direction by Total_ Transaction_Change_Pct % (ending at Te rminal_Period_Transaction_Units units) between Start_Year and End_Year .3. Comparing Start_Year to End_Ye ar , supply Supply_Trend_Direction 

to Terminal_Period_Supply_Units 

(Total_Supply_Change_Pct % Supp ly_Trend_Direction ), and demand 

Transaction_Trend_Direction to Te rminal_Period_Transaction_Units 

(Total_Transaction_Change_Pct %

Transaction_Trend_Direction ). 

Continued on next page... Table 12 – continued from previous page Title Template Function Caption Template Summary Template 

1. New-House Market Capac-ity Analysis 2. New Con-struction Vol-ume & Supply Capacity 3. Emerging Residential Market Scale Evaluation Supply-Transaction Area 1. City Block : Historical Sup-ply and Transaction Area Statistics ( Start_Year -End_Year )2. Statistical Review of His-torical Supply and Transac-tion Area for City ’s Block 

(Start_Year -End_Year )3. Historical Data: Supplied vs. Sold Area in City ’s Block 

(Start_Year -End_Year )1. From Start_Year to End_Year , in-ventory in this region Supply_Trend _Direction by Total_Supply_Chang e_Pct %, while the transaction area  

> Transaction_Trend_Direction

by 

> Total_Transaction_Change_Pct

%. 2. Area-wise inventory Supply_Trend_D irection at a Total_Supply_Change_Pct %rate, contrasting with the transaction area which Transaction_Trend_Direct ion by Total_Transaction_Change_Pct %through End_Year .3. The region experienced a Total_Supp ly_Change_Pct % Supply_Trend_Direction 

in supply area and a Total_Transactio n_Change_Pct % Transaction_Trend_Dire ction in sold area between Start_Year 

and End_Year .1. Resale-House Capac-ity & Structure 2. Resale Mar-ket Scale & Product Break-down 3. Secondary Market Stock & Unit Compo-sition Historical Delivery Metrics 1. City Block Resale House: Overview of Historical De-livery Metrics ( Start_Year -

> End_Year

)2. Resale Market in City ’s 

> Block

: A Look at Historical Transaction Metrics ( Start_Ye ar -End_Year )3. Historical Performance Overview for the Resale Mar-ket in City ’s Block (Start_Year -

> End_Year

)1. From Start_Year to End_Year , the number of resale transactions in this area Transaction_Trend_Direction 

from Base_Period_Transaction_Units 

units to Terminal_Period_Transact ion_Units units, with a cumulative  

> Transaction_Trend_Direction

of Transa ction_Change_Units units, representing a Transaction_Trend_Direction of 

> Total_Transaction_Change_Pct

%. 2. Resale volumes moved from Ba se_Period_Transaction_Units to Te rminal_Period_Transaction_Units 

units ( Start_Year -End_Year ), marking a 

> Transaction_Change_Units

-unit Transact ion_Trend_Direction or a Total_Transact ion_Change_Pct % change. 3. The market observed a Transact ion_Trend_Direction in resales to  

> Transaction_Change_Units

units, a 

> Total_Transaction_Change_Pct

% Transa ction_Trend_Direction relative to the 

> Base_Period_Transaction_Units

-unit baseline in Start_Year .

Continued on next page... Table 12 – continued from previous page Title Template Function Caption Template Summary Template 

1. Resale-House Capac-ity & Structure 2. Resale Mar-ket Scale & Product Break-down 3. Secondary Market Stock & Unit Compo-sition Annual Delivery Unit Count 1. Historical Delivery Unit Count Statistics for City Block 

Resale House ( Start_Year -

> End_Year

)2. Historical Transaction Vol-ume (Units) for Resale Homes in City ’s Block (Start_Year -

> End_Year

)3. Unit Sales Statistics for the Existing Home Market in City ’s Block (Start_Year -

> End_Year

)1. From Start_Year to End_Year , the number of resale house transactions in this area Transaction_Trend_Direction 

from Base_Period_Transaction_Units 

units to Terminal_Period_Transact ion_Units units, with a cumulative  

> Transaction_Trend_Direction

of Transa ction_Change_Units units. 2. A net Transaction_Trend_Dire ction of Transaction_Change_Units 

units was recorded as resale volume  

> Transaction_Trend_Direction

from  

> Base_Period_Transaction_Units

to 

> Terminal_Period_Transaction_Units

between Start_Year and End_Year .3. The trend Transaction_Trend_Di rection brought resale figures to Te rminal_Period_Transaction_Units by 

> End_Year

, a Transaction_Trend_Direction 

of Transaction_Change_Units from the start of the period. 1. Resale-House Capac-ity & Structure 2. Resale Mar-ket Scale & Product Break-down 3. Secondary Market Stock & Unit Compo-sition Annual Average Price Trend 1. City Block Resale House: 

> Start_Year

-End_Year Annual Average Price Trend Analysis 2. Annual Average Price Evo-lution for Resale Homes in 

> City

’s Block (Start_Year -

> End_Year

)3.Analysis of Annual Mean Price Fluctuation for Resale Properties in City ’s Block ,

> Start_Year

-End_Year 

1. Resale average prices trended Pric e_Trend_Direction from Base_Period_Tr ansaction_Price yuan/m 2 in Start_Year 

to Terminal_Period_Transaction_Price 

yuan/m 2 in End_Year (Transaction_Chan ge_Price ). 2. The market valuation followed a  

> Price_Trend_Direction

path, adjusting from Base_Period_Transaction_Price 

to Terminal_Period_Transaction_Price 

yuan/m 2 amid Transaction_Change_Pri ce conditions. 3. Between Start_Year and End_Ye ar , prices Price_Trend_Direction to 

> Terminal_Period_Transaction_Price

yuan/m 2 from a base of Base_Period_ Transaction_Price , characterizing a  

> Transaction_Change_Price

market. 

Continued on next page... You are an AI assistant specializing in document layout analysis. Your task is to analyze a PPT slide image and identify specific components: Main Title, Body Text, Chart Caption, and Table/Bar Chart/Line Chart.  Please strictly follow the JSON format below to return the results. The output should be a list where each element represents a recognized component. 

shape_type : Type of the recognized component. Allowed values: 'slide-title', 'body-text', 

'caption', 'table', 'chart-bar', 'chart-line'. 

content : The text content of the component. (Note: For 'table', 'chart-bar', and 'chart-line', keep this field empty string). 

bbox : Bounding box coordinates of the component in the image, formatted as [x_min, y_min, x_max, y_max]. If a specific component type is not found, do not include it in the list.  Do not output any explanations, extra text, or markdown formatting.  Return only a raw JSON array. 

PPT Layout Parsing Prompt Figure 5: The prompt used for multimodal layout parsing to predict semantic labels and bounding boxes. 

Table 12 – continued from previous page Title Template Function Caption Template Summary Template 

1. Neighbor-hood Price Trend 2. Regional Price Move-ment & Trajec-tory 3. Community Value Trend Analysis Monthly Average Price Trend 1. City Block Monthly Average Price Trend Analysis, Start_Mo nth -End_Month 

2. Analysis of Monthly Aver-age Price Movements in City ’s  

> Block

(Start_Month -End_Month )3. Month-over-Month Average Price Fluctuation for City ’s  

> Block

(Start_Month -End_Month )1. Over Start_Month -End_Month , the average transaction price of apart-ments in this community went from 

> Base_Period_Transaction_Price

yuan/m 2 Transaction_Trend_Direction 

to Terminal_Period_Transactio n_Price yuan/m 2, with a cumula-tive Price_Trend_Direction of  

> Transaction_Change_Price

yuan/m 2.2. Between Start_Month and End_Month ,prices Transaction_Trend_Direct ion by Transaction_Change_Price 

yuan/m 2, shifting the average from  

> Base_Period_Transaction_Price

to 

> Terminal_Period_Transaction_Price

yuan/m 2.3. A net Transaction_Trend_Direction 

of Transaction_Change_Price yuan/m 2

was observed Over Start_Month -End_Mo nth , as prices moved to Terminal_Per iod_Transaction_Price yuan/m 2 from 

> Base_Period_Transaction_Price

.Please perform the following data extraction task. Based on the given slide params (including the caption title, row headers, and column headers),  generate a JSON object that meets the requirements. Specific steps are as follows: 1. Parse parameter information ：Carefully analyze the provided slide_params, extracting the caption, row_headers, and column_headers. 2. Extract key elements ：

- Table affiliation: Clearly identify the database table to which the data belongs. - Block: Identify geographic region or block information from the caption (e.g., "Liangxiang" 

or "Hengli Town"). - Time range: Extract the start date (start_date) and end date (end_date) from the caption, in the 

format 'YYYY-MM-DD'. - Retrieval fields: Infer the required fields based on row_headers and column_headers. 3. Specific parameter explanations: ：

- Database: Includes ['beijing_new_house', 'beijing_resale_house'], where 'beijing_new_house' 

corresponds to Beijing new house data, 'beijing_resale_house' 

corresponds to Beijing resale house data, and other cities (Guangzhou, Shenzhen) follow the 

same pattern. - Select_columns: Includes ['date_code', 'supply_sets', 'trade_sets', 'dim_area', 'dim_price', 

'dim_unit_price']. 

Among them, 'date_code' indicates the date, 'supply_sets' indicates supply units, 'trade_sets' 

indicates transaction units, 'dim_area' indicates property area, 

'dim_price' indicates property price, 'dim_unit_price' indicates price per square meter, and 

'project' indicates neighborhood project name. 

Examples: 

Slide_params:{ 

"caption": "2020-2022 Beijing Liangxiang Area and Total Price Cross Statistics", 

"row_headers": ["0-20m²", "20-40m²", "40-60m²", "60-80m²", "80-100m²", "100-120m²", "120-140m²", "140-160m²", "160-180m²", "180-200m²", "200-220m²", "220-240m²", "240-260m²", "260-280m²", "280-300m²", "≥300m²"], 

"column_headers": ["Supply Count (Sets)", "Deliv. Count (Sets)"] 

}

Response: 

{{ 

"connection": {{ 

"table": ["beijing_new_house"], 

}}, 

"select_columns": ["supply_sets", "trade_sets", "dim_area"], 

"filters": {{ 

"city": "Beijing", 

"block": "Liangxiang", 

"start_date": "2020-01-01", 

"end_date": "2022-12-31", 

}}, 

}} 

Data Source Extraction Prompt Figure 6: The prompt for data source extraction, mapping slide content to database schema slots. Please execute the following data extraction task. Based on the provided slide_params (including titles, row/column headers), select the most appropriate function from the 11 predefined options and generate a compliant JSON object. 

A. Function Library Definitions 

Select the fun_tool.fun that best matches the input from the following list: 

1. get_supply_sales_counts_stats: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Area Ranges (e.g., "80-100m²"), and column headers contain counts for both Supply and Transaction (Trade). Usage: Analyzing the supply-demand structure (supply units vs. transaction units) across different area segments. 

2. compute_area_num_stats: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Area Ranges, and column headers involve only Total Distribution (e.g., "Count", "Distribution") without distinguishing between supply and demand. Usage: Statistical distribution of housing unit counts across different area segments. 

3. compute_price_num_stats: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Total Price Ranges (e.g., "3.0-4.0M"). Usage: Statistical distribution of housing unit counts across different total price segments. 

4. compute_area_price_cross_stats: 

Trigger Condition: A two-dimensional cross-analysis. Typically, row and column headers correspond to Area Segments and Total Price Segments respectively, or the title explicitly mentions "Cross Analysis" or "Area vs. Total Price." Usage: Generating a cross-tabulation heat map (Area Range × Total Price Range). 

5. compute_annual_traded_units: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Years, and column headers focus on Units/Sets, containing both supply and transactions. Usage: Comparison of annual trends in supply and demand units. 

6. compute_annual_traded_area: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Years, and column headers focus on Area (sqm). Usage: Comparison of annual trends in supply and demand area. 

7. compute_market_capacity: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Years, and column headers are comprehensive (containing multi-dimensional metrics such as Area, Units, Average Price). Usage: Comprehensive annual market capacity analysis. 

8. compute_house_total_and_avg_price: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Years, and column headers include Transaction Volume and Average Price, etc. Usage: Overview of historical performance metrics (trade_counts, avg_unit_price, dim_area). 

9. compute_house_transaction_count_distribution: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Years, and column headers focus solely on Transaction Units. Usage: Analysis of annual transaction volume trends. 

10. compute_house_avg_price_distribution: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Years, and column headers focus solely on Average Price. Usage: Analysis of annual average price trends. 

11. get_housing_price_trend: 

Trigger Condition: Row headers represent Monthly Dates (e.g., "2023-01", "2023-02") rather than pure years. Usage: Monthly price trend analysis. 

B. Argument Inference 

Calculate fun_tool.args based on the content of row_headers: area_range_size: If row headers are area segments (e.g., "80-100m²"), calculate the step size (100 -80 = 20). Ignore if not applicable. price_range_size: If row headers are price segments (e.g., "3.0-3.5M"), calculate the step size (3.5 -3.0 = 0.5). Ignore if not applicable. Note: Even for trend-related functions, if specific interval filtering is implied in the context, these parameters should be extracted; otherwise, leave them empty. 

Function Logic Extraction Prompt Figure 7: The prompt for closed-domain function logic extraction via predefined tool invocation. Please execute the following table understanding task and strictly return the result as a valid JSON array only: 1) Parameter Extraction: 

Analyze the input table_caption and table_data to extract key parameters. Organize these parameters into a 4-tuple structure: [table_type, header_info, source_field, statistic_method]. Return this tuple as an element within a JSON array. 2) Tuple Schema Definition: 

- Table_type : Reflects the structural logic of the table. 

- Enum: ["field-constraint", "constraint-field", "cross-constraint"] 

- Definitions: - field-constraint: Column headers represent specific constraints (e.g., ranges), while row headers represent metrics/fields. - constraint-field: Column headers represent metrics/fields, while row headers represent constraints. - cross-constraint: Both row and column headers represent different constraints, with the intersection being the statistical value. - Header_info : Contains details about the headers and their implied constraints. 

- headers (Array): The original text of the headers extracted directly from the table without 

modification. 

- constraint_detail (Object): The parsed logic of the constraints. - type (String): The category of the constraint. Enum: ["area_range", "price_range", "year", "month"]. - template (String): Parameterized template for dynamic range formatting (e.g., {{}}-{{}}M). - bounds (Array): An array defining the boundary values [start, end]. - step (Number): The hyperparameter indicating the step size (e.g., 0.75). - Note: For cross-constraint types, this field should be an array containing two distinct 

constraint objects. 

- Source_field : The inferred database field corresponding to the table content. 

- Enum: ["supply_sets", "trade_sets", "dim_area", "dim_price", "dim_unit_price"] 

- Mappings: - supply_sets: Number of supplied units. - trade_sets: Number of traded/sold units. - dim_area: Property area. - dim_price: Property total price. - dim_unit_price: Price per square meter. 

- Statistic_method : The method used for data aggregation. 

- Enum: ["count", "sum", "mean"] 

- Mappings: - count: Frequency or count (e.g., number of units). - sum: Total summation (e.g., total area). - mean: Average value (e.g., average price). 3) Output Format: 

Output ONLY a valid JSON array containing the 4-tuple(s).Strictly NO additional text, preambles, explanations, markdown code blocks (e.g., ```json), or trailing whitespace. 

Function Logic Extraction Prompt Figure 8: The prompt for open-domain logic extraction, decomposing unknown logic into atomic parameters. Based on the user's query, extract the following information and generate a strict JSON object. Fields include: 

city: city name (string) 

block: block name (string) 

project: project name (string) 

start_date: start date (string, format 'YYYY-MM-DD') 

end_date: end date (string, format 'YYYY-MM-DD') 

area_range_size: area range size (number or string, such as "20") 

price_range_size: price range size (number or string, such as "1") 

General rule: If a field is not explicitly mentioned in the user's query, fill it with default. 

Requirements: 

1.Only output a valid JSON object, without any explanations, extra text, or code block markers. 

2.All dates must use the 'YYYY-MM-DD' format. 

3.JSON keys must exactly match the above field names, with values enclosed in double quotes. 

Examples: Query: Based on this slide, please generate a slide for the Beijing Huairou District sector from 

2021 to 2023. 

Response: 

{{ 

"city": "Beijing", 

"block": "Huairou District", 

"project": "default", 

"start_date": "2021-01-01", 

"end_date": "2023-12-31", 

"area_range_size": "default", 

"price_range_size": "default" 

}} 

User Instruction Parsing Prompt Figure 9: The prompt for user instruction parsing, modeled as a parameter state update task. Please execute the following SQL query generation task and strictly return the result according to the requirement of "only output a valid JSON array": 

Task requirements: 

1) Parse parameters ：

- Extract connection.table, select columns, and filters from slide_params. 

2) Build WHERE clause ：

- Condition fields: city, block, project, date_code (generated from start_date/end_date). 

- Ignore conditions with value default (do not include in WHERE). 

- For non-default string values (such as city/region/block/project name), enclose in single 

quotes, e.g., city = 'Beijing'. 

- Date range: If start_date and/or end_date are provided, use: 

- Both provided: date_code >= 'YYYY-MM-DD' AND date_code <= 'YYYY-MM-DD' 

- Only start_date: date_code >= 'YYYY-MM-DD' 

- Only end_date: date_code <= 'YYYY-MM-DD' 

3) Generate SQL ：

- FROM uses schema prefix: public.<table> 

- SELECT columns output in input order. 

4) Output format (extremely important ：

- Only output a valid JSON array, with array elements as strings (one SQL string per element). 

- Use standard JSON double quotes to wrap strings; single quotes inside strings are allowed 

(SQL text). 

- Do not output anything other than JSON: no prefix/suffix text, no Chinese quotes, no special 

quotes, no comments, no Markdown code block markers, no extra line breaks. 

Examples ：

slide_params:{{ 

'connection': {{'table': ['beijing_new_house']}}, 

'select_columns': ['supply_sets', 'trade_sets', 'dim_area'], 

'filters': {{ 

'city': Beijing, 

'block': Huairou District, 

'project': default, 

'start_date': 2020-01-01, 

'end_date': 2022-12-31, 

'area_range_size': default, 

'price_range_size': default 

}} 

}} Output ："SELECT supply_sets, trade_sets, dim_area FROM public.beijing_new_house WHERE city = 'Beijing' AND block = 'Huairou District' AND date_code >= '2020-01-01' AND date_code <= '2022-12-31'" 

SQL Extraction Prompt Figure 10: The prompt for SQL generation, converting updated parameters into executable database queries. You need to refer to the provided template_data and template_conclusion to generate a corresponding conclusion for the new data.  Please strictly follow the following steps to ensure the output is professional, concise, and highly matched to the data: 

(1) Data Understanding: Carefully analyze the structure of the template data, including key variables (such as location,  time, numerical indicators, trend descriptions, etc.), and identify the generation logic of the template conclusion,  such as how to highlight market characteristics, compare changes, or summarize insights based on the data. Pay special  attention to professional terms in the real estate field, for example, "generally, units above 140 ㎡ are called upgraded units." 

(2)Information Replacement and Adaptation: For the new data, map and accurately replace the key elements in the template  conclusion one by one, including locations (such as the phrasing "this area" or "this community"), numerical indicators  (such as area, price, transaction volume), and trend descriptions (such as growth rate or proportion). If the new data  ntroduces new variables (such as different housing type distributions or market dynamics), adjust accordingly to maintain  logical consistency, while retaining the overall narrative style and professional definitions of the template. 

(3)Conclusion Generation: Ensure that the generated new conclusion maintains the logical structure of the original template  conclusion while being completely consistent with the new data, and present it in clear and professional language. 

Examples: 

template_data: 

2021-2023 Supply and Transaction Unit Statistics in Beijing's Dougezhuang-Heizhuanghu 

Supply Count (Sets) Deliv. Count (Sets) 

0-20m² 136 18 

20-40m² 18 0

40-60m² 15 21 

60-80m² 122 264 

...... 

240-260m² 28 7

260-280m² 9 28 

280-300m² 0 8

≥300m² 70 101 

template_conclusion: 

From 2021-2023, Dougezhuang-Heizhuanghu's core supply-demand area was 80-100m², with 

upgraded units centered on 160-180m². 

data: 

2020-2022 Supply and Transaction Unit Statistics in Beijing's Beiqijia 

supply_counts trade_counts 

0-20m² 136 18 

20-40m² 18 0

40-60m² 15 21 

60-80m² 122 264 

80-100m² 230 206 

...... 

240-260m² 28 7

260-280m² 9 28 

280-300m² 0 8

≥300m² 70 101 

conclusion: 

From 2020-2022, Beiqijia's core supply-demand area was 80-100m², with upgraded units centered 

on ≥300m². 

Summary Update Prompt Figure 11: The prompt for fact-aware summary update based on data changes.