Title: Action Agent: Agentic Video Generation Meets Flow-Constrained Diffusion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01477v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 00:49:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Action Agent: Agentic Video Generation Meets Flow-Constrained Diffusion 

Jeffrin Sam*, Nguyen Khang*, Yara Mahmoud, Miguel Altamirano Cabrera, Dzmitry Tsetserukou 

Abstract — We present Action Agent, a two-stage framework that unifies agentic navigation video generation with flow-constrained diffusion control for multi-embodiment robot nav-igation. In Stage I, a large language model (LLM) acts as an orchestration module that selects video diffusion models, refines prompts through iterative validation, and accumulates cross-task memory to synthesize physically plausible first-person navigation videos from language and image inputs. This increases video generation success from 35% (single-shot) to 86% across 50 navigation tasks. In Stage II, we introduce FlowDiT, a Flow-Constrained Diffusion Transformer that converts optimized goal videos and language instructions into continuous velocity commands using action-space denoising diffusion. FlowDiT integrates DINOv2 visual features, learned optical flow for ego-motion representation, and CLIP language embeddings for semantic stopping. We pretrain on the RECON outdoor navigation dataset and fine-tune on 203 Unitree G1 humanoid episodes collected in Isaac Sim to calibrate velocity dynamics. A single 43M-parameter checkpoint achieves 73.2% navigation success in simulation and 64.7% task completion on a real Unitree G1 in unseen indoor environments under open-loop execution, while operating at 40–47 Hz. We evaluate Action Agent across three embodiments: a Unitree G1 humanoid (real hardware), a drone, and a wheeled mobile robot (Isaac Sim), demonstrating that decoupling trajectory imagination from execution yields a scalable and embodiment-aware paradigm for language-guided navigation. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Robot navigation from high-level natural language in-structions remains a fundamental challenge in embodied AI. Bridging language to reliable motion requires interpreting task intent, grounding it in a specific scene, and producing physically plausible behavior under diverse environments and robot embodiments. Classical navigation pipelines address this complexity through a modular decomposition: simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) to estimate pose and build a geometric representation, waypoint or trajectory planning over that representation, and hand-engineered controllers to track the plan. This separation offers interpretability and safety hooks, but it often requires careful tuning per robot and sensor suite, and it can degrade under distribution shift (e.g., changes in layout, lighting, clutter, or dynamics) or when transferring to new embodiments [1], [2]. Conversely, recent end-to-end visuomotor policies aim to bypass explicit planning by directly mapping observa-tions (and sometimes language) to actions. While effec- 

> * Denotes equal contribution. Authors are with the Intelligent Space Robotics Laboratory, Skoltech, Bolshoy Boulevard, 30, Moscow 121205, Russia.

{Jeffrin.Sam, Nguyen.Khang, Yara Mahmoud, M.Altamirano, D.Tsetserukou }@skoltech.ru 

Fig. 1: Action Agent system overview. Stage I performs agentic trajectory imagination by generating and validating a first-person vi-sual intermediate representation (reference navigation video) from a language instruction and an initial observation. Stage II executes this reference using FlowDiT to produce continuous velocity com-mands for deployment across multiple robot embodiments. 

tive in narrow regimes, such monolithic Vision-Language-Action (VLA) approaches can entangle high-level intent with low-level control. This “black box” nature makes adaptation and failure recovery difficult, demands immense computational footprints that preclude high-frequency edge deployment, and frequently suffers from spatial reasoning hallucinations [3]–[5]. We propose a two-stage decomposition that makes the interface between intention and execution explicit. While end-to-end models entangle intent with control, Action Agent introduces an explicit Visual Intermediate Representa-tion (VIR) . This allows the system to “rehearse” the trajec-tory in the pixel space-where generative foundation models are most capable-before committing to metric-space actions. An overview of the proposed system is shown in Fig. 1.  

> •

Stage I: Digital rehearsal via agentic video gener-ation. Given an instruction and a scene observation, an AI agent orchestrates a vision-language model and a text-to-video generator to synthesize candidate first-person navigation videos. A reasoning module scores each candidate using a structured rubric (e.g., instruc-tion adherence, physics consistency). The agent itera-tively refines prompts using this feedback and a cross-

> arXiv:2605.01477v1 [cs.RO] 2 May 2026

task memory buffer until a physically plausible VIR is obtained [6], [7].  

> •

Stage II: Diffusion-based trajectory execution via FlowDiT. Conditioned on the validated VIR and lan-guage -and optionally live observations- FlowDiT pro-duces continuous velocity commands (vx, v y , ω ). It supports both open-loop execution (from the reference video alone) and closed-loop operation at 40–47 Hz with 43M trainable parameters. This decomposition enables several practical capabilities:  

> •

Embodiment-aware trajectory imagination: Stage I conditions generation on embodiment-relevant con-straints via the agentic validation loop, producing a VIR that respects the robot’s physical capabilities.  

> •

Multi-modal action modeling: Stage II integrates appearance-driven cues (RGB semantics) with explicit local geometry (optical flow) to resolve “looming” depth ambiguities [8], [9].  

> •

Language-conditioned stopping: The VIR encodes motion, while language explicitly guides semantic ter-mination (where/when to stop) [10], [11].  

> •

Edge-deployable execution: FlowDiT achieves a 161 ×

parameter reduction compared to state-of-the-art VLAs, supporting high-frequency (40-47 Hz) reactive execu-tion on consumer hardware. In this paper, we evaluate Stage I and report how agen-tic digital rehearsal improves the reliability of synthesized navigation videos. We then evaluate Stage II across three embodiments: a wheeled mobile robot, a drone, and open-loop execution on real Unitree G1 humanoid hardware. The goal is to demonstrate how explicitly separating visual imagination from metric control creates a scalable pathway for foundation models in robotics. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Diffusion Models for Control and Navigation 

Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful tool for robotics control due to their ability to represent multi-modal action distributions and to generate temporally coherent tra-jectories [12]–[14]. In robotics, diffusion-based policies have been applied to manipulation and control as an alternative to regression objectives that can average across distinct valid behaviors [15]. In navigation contexts, diffusion formulations have also been used for goal conditioning and sequential decision-making, including video- or goal-conditioned vari-ants such as NoMaD [16]. This literature motivates diffusion-based execution modules that can generate action sequences conditioned on rich context while maintaining robustness to multi-modality and ambiguity. However, such approaches typically rely on geometric or latent goal representations rather than explicitly imagined visual trajectory references. 

B. Ego-Motion Representations and Optical Flow for Con-trol 

Beyond semantic visual representations, ego-motion cues can provide complementary information for control, espe-cially for short-horizon motion and directional disambigua-tion. Optical flow has long been studied as a motion repre-sentation in visual odometry and SLAM pipelines, and as a cue for camera motion estimation [9], [17], [18]. In learning-based navigation and control, explicit motion representations (e.g., flow or ego-motion predictors) can reduce sensitivity to appearance variation and provide a more direct signal for local motion dynamics [19], [20]. In parallel, generative video modeling research has explored imposing flow- or motion-related constraints to improve temporal consistency of synthesized videos [21], [22]. These works collectively suggest that incorporating explicit ego-motion representa-tions alongside semantic features is a promising direction for stabilizing control under changing visual conditions. 

C. Language-Conditioned Vision-Based Navigation 

Language-conditioned navigation has been approached through both classical modular stacks and learning-based policies. Classical pipelines typically factor navigation into (i) mapping and localization (e.g., SLAM), (ii) explicit planning over a geometric representation, and (iii) low-level control for plan tracking [1], [2]. This decomposition provides interpretability and safety hooks, but often requires careful tuning and can degrade under distribution shift or when transferring across embodiments (e.g., viewpoint, sen-sor suite, and dynamics) [1], [23]. Learning-based navi-gation methods instead train visuomotor policies that map observations (and sometimes language) to actions, aiming to reduce reliance on explicit mapping and planning [16], [24]. Vision-based transformer policies such as ViNT [24] adopt pretrained visual encoders to directly map RGB observations to navigation actions, demonstrating strong generalization across indoor scenes. Nevertheless, these models entangle high-level intent with low-level control, without explicitly separating trajectory imagination from execution. 

D. Video-Conditioned Navigation and Learning from Demonstrations 

A growing body of work studies learning robot policies from demonstrations represented as trajectories, videos, or video-like references. Imitation learning and learning-from-demonstration approaches commonly rely on expert trajec-tories collected in simulation or on real platforms [3], [25]. More recent methods explore using videos as an intermediate representation for goal conditioning or policy learning. For example, diffusion-based policy learning has been used to model action distributions from demonstrations [15], and goal-conditioned navigation systems have been proposed that condition policies on reference videos to specify intended behavior [16]. Other approaches unify multiple sensing and action modalities through shared video representations or latent video objectives [26]. These lines of work motivate the use of video as a compact interface between intent and control, while also highlighting the dependence of many approaches on the availability and quality of reference demonstrations. Algorithm 1 LLM-based agentic optimization loop (per task).                                                                          

> LLM-based agentic optimization loop (per task) Input: language L, image(s) I0(and optionally Ig), model pool M=
> {WAN ,LTX }
> 1. Load rules.md ,long-term memory MLT ,short-term memory
> MST ←∅.
> 2. Select model m←route( I0, I g, M LT ).
> 3. For iter = 1 to Kmax :
> 3.1 p←VLM( L, I 0;m, M LT )(enhanced prompt).
> 3.2 V←GenVideo( m, p ).
> 3.3 (PA ,PP ,VQ) , R ←Evaluator( V, L ).
> 3.4 If mean(PA ,PP ,VQ) ≥τ, update MLT and return V.
> 3.5 Else set b←identify bottleneck(PA ,PP ,VQ) .Set p←refine prompt( p, b, R, M ST , M LT ).Append (p, b, R )to MST .
> 4. Return best-found V(or fail).

E. LLMs for Robotics and Agentic Iterative Refinement 

Recent advances in video diffusion models (e.g., Stable Video Diffusion [6], Runway Gen-2 [27], Cosmos [7]) enable high-quality task-conditioned video generation. However, naive prompting often produces videos that violate physical constraints or fail to align with robot embodiment capabil-ities. Large language models have been used for robotic reasoning in works such as RT-X [5], Gato [28], Code-as-Policies [29], and SayCan [11]. These methods typically apply LLMs in forward planning or few-shot reasoning set-tings. In contrast, we treat the LLM as a meta-optimizer that iteratively refines generation prompts using structured multi-objective feedback [30]–[32]. Such rubric-based validation aligns with recent “LLM-as-a-judge” evaluation frameworks that approximate human preference with strong model-based scoring [33]. More recently, large-scale vision-language-action models such as OpenVLA [4] leverage foundation vi-sual encoders and large language models to directly produce robotic actions from multimodal inputs. While these models benefit from scale, they often require substantial trainable ca-pacity and extensive pretraining, motivating more parameter-efficient alternatives for embodiment-aware navigation. III. M ETHOD 

Action Agent decomposes language-guided navigation into two distinct stages to explicitly decouple high-level 

trajectory imagination from low-level control execution :

Stage I: (L, I 0) → Vgoal (1) 

Stage II: (Vgoal , [It], L ) → at, (2) where L is a natural language instruction, I0 is the initial scene observation, Vgoal is the synthesized reference video, 

It is an optional live camera feed (brackets denote optional-ity), and at is a sequence of continuous velocity commands. When It is unavailable, FlowDiT operates in open-loop mode using Vgoal and L alone; when available, it enables closed-loop reactive execution. The detailed per-task optimization procedure is summa-rized in Algorithm 1. 

A. Stage I: Agentic Trajectory Imagination as Digital Re-hearsal 

Unlike classical planning pipelines that rely on pre-built geometric maps, Stage I performs trajectory planning di-rectly in the visual domain by synthesizing a first-person reference video Vgoal . However, single-shot generative video frequently suffers from physical hallucinations (e.g., passing through solid objects or violating kinematic constraints). To bridge generative imagination and physical reality, we frame Stage I as a rehearsal-based validation layer . As illustrated in Fig. 2, a central large language model acts as an orchestration agent that iteratively proposes, generates, and critiques candidate trajectories. It coordinates three com-ponents: (i) a vision-language model (Qwen3-VL [34]) for structured prompt construction, (ii) a text-to-video diffusion generator (WAN 2.2 [35] or LTX-Video [36]), and (iii) a reasoning-based validator (Cosmos-Reason1 [7]) that evalu-ates candidate videos against structured physical and visual criteria. By evaluating these candidates against structured crite-ria, the agent effectively “rehearses” the trajectory in pixel space. This formulation ensures that the generated Visual Intermediate Representation (VIR) is physically plausible 

before any velocity commands are issued to the robot. Consequently, Action Agent trades offline planning compute (the agentic loop) for online execution safety, decoupling semantic reasoning from the high-frequency control loop of Stage II. 

1) Formal Objective: We formulate Stage I as a discrete optimization over the space of prompt modifiers and pipeline parameters p ∈ P . The objective is to maximize a multi-modal reward function evaluated by the reasoning module: 

p⋆ = arg max 

> p∈P



λ1 PA (Vp) + λ2 PP (Vp) + λ3 VQ (Vp)



subject to mean( PA , PP , VQ ) ≥ τ, (3) where Vp is the generated video under strategy p, and PA, PP, and VQ denote Prompt Adherence, Physical Plausibility, and Visual Quality, respectively. The threshold τ (empirically set to 80) enforces minimum safety and quality constraints before the trajectory is accepted for execution. The search over P is realized through discrete parameter edits rather than continuous gradient updates. The orchestrat-ing LLM proposes modifications such as: (i) altering motion descriptors, (ii) adjusting camera dynamics, (iii) modifying negative prompts, and (iv) switching video generators. The search policy is heuristic and bottleneck-first, executing a greedy local update targeting the lowest-scoring rubric component to minimize iterations. 

2) Agentic Optimization Loop: The detailed per-task pro-cedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. For each task, the agent executes the following loop bounded by Kmax = 5 : 

> •

Model Routing: The routing function selects a video generator based on embodiment dynamics (e.g., single-image diffusion for humanoid viewpoints, or keyframe-interpolation diffusion for drone dynamics). Fig. 2: Stage I: agentic trajectory imagination (digital rehearsal). A central LLM agent orchestrates (i) a vision–language model for prompt construction, (ii) a text-to-video diffusion generator, and (iii) a reasoning-based evaluator that scores candidate videos and produces structured critiques. The agent iteratively refines prompts using feedback and memory until a validated reference navigation video Vgoal  

> is obtained.
> •

Prompt Construction: A vision-language model pro-duces an enhanced prompt describing only dynamic ego-motion changes relative to I0, explicitly avoiding re-description of static scene elements to prevent hallu-cinated geometry.  

> •

Video Generation: The selected diffusion model syn-thesizes a short first-person navigation clip (5–15 s).  

> •

Structured Validation: A reasoning-capable evaluator critiques the video, returning scalar scores for PA, PP, and VQ, alongside a structured critique identifying dominant failure modes (e.g., obstacle fixation, trajec-tory scale mismatch).  

> •

Bottleneck Refinement: If mean( PA , PP , VQ ) < τ , the agent identifies the dominant bottleneck and modifies the prompt or pipeline accordingly. 

3) Three-Tier Memory Architecture: To improve cross-task reliability and reduce iteration count, Stage I maintains three forms of memory: 

a) Static Constitutional Rules.: A fixed rule set (rules.md ) enforces behavioral constraints such as bottleneck-first optimization, anti-hallucination guardrails, and structured output formatting. 

b) Long-Term Memory ( MLT ).: A persistent store that accumulates successful strategies across tasks, logging effec-tive model–embodiment pairings, negative prompt templates, and recovery strategies for tight passages. 

c) Short-Term Memory ( MST ).: A per-task buffer that records iteration history and failed refinement attempts, pre-venting cyclic repetition of ineffective strategies. 

4) Output Representation: The final output of Stage I is the validated first-person navigation video Vgoal . This video serves as a high-bandwidth Visual Intermediate Representa-tion (VIR) that explicitly encodes:  

> •

Directional ego-motion and trajectory curvature.  

> •

Local geometry for relative obstacle avoidance.  

> •

Temporal stopping behavior dictated by the language instruction. Importantly, by resolving semantic ambiguity in the pixel domain, the VIR decouples high-level reasoning from low-level control, providing a dense, embodiment-aware prior for Stage II.          

> Fig. 3: Stage II: FlowDiT execution module. FlowDiT conditions on the validated reference video Vgoal (visual features and motion cues) and the instruction Lto predict a horizon-Hsequence of velocity commands (vx, v y, ω ). The policy executes in a receding-horizon manner by applying the first action and re-evaluating at the next timestep (with optional live observation Itwhen available).

B. Stage II: Flow-Constrained Diffusion Transformer (FlowDiT) 

Stage II converts the validated reference video Vgoal into continuous velocity commands in a real-time closed-loop control setting. Unlike classical trajectory tracking methods that operate on explicit geometric paths, FlowDiT learns a conditional action distribution directly from visual and motion representations (see Fig. 3). 

1) Problem Formulation: Given:  

> •

A validated goal video Vgoal from Stage I,  

> •

A natural language instruction L, 

> •

Optionally, a live observation It (omitted in open-loop mode), FlowDiT predicts a horizon-H sequence of velocity com-mands: at:t+H−1 = {(vx, v y , ω )}t:t+H−1, H = 8 , (4) where vx and vy denote translational velocities in the robot frame and ω denotes angular velocity. Only the first action in the predicted sequence is executed. The model is re-evaluated at the next timestep with up-dated observation It+1 , yielding a receding-horizon model-predictive diffusion control scheme operating at 40–47 Hz. 

2) Conditioning Representation: FlowDiT is conditioned on a 2304-dimensional vector c that integrates semantic, temporal, and linguistic cues: 

c = [ goal vision 

| {z }

> 768

∥ goal flow 

| {z } 

> 256

∥ obs vision 

| {z }

> 768

∥ goal lang 

| {z } 

> 512

]. (5) Each component is defined as follows: 

a) Goal Vision Embedding.: We encode selected frames of Vgoal using DINOv2 [8], producing a 768-dimensional representation capturing scene layout and semantic structure. 

b) Goal Flow Embedding.: A learned 6-channel CNN (5.2M parameters) extracts optical flow between consecutive frames of Vgoal . The resulting flow fields are aggregated through temporal pooling and projected to a 256-dimensional embedding. This term provides explicit ego-motion cues, disambiguating approach versus retreat and stabilizing short-horizon control. 

c) Live Observation Embedding (Optional).: When available, the current camera frame It is encoded using DINOv2 to produce a 768-dimensional state representation. In open-loop mode, this term is replaced by a repeated encoding of the last frame of Vgoal .

d) Language Embedding.: The instruction L is encoded using CLIP [10] to produce a 512-dimensional semantic vector. This term enables language-conditioned stopping and disambiguation of visually similar goals. 

3) Diffusion Policy Formulation: We model the condi-tional action distribution using a denoising diffusion process. Let a0 ∈ RH×3 denote the ground-truth action block. We sample Gaussian noise ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ) and define the forward diffusion process: 

at = √¯αta0 + √1 − ¯αt ϵ, (6) where ¯αt is the cumulative product of (1 −βt) under a linear noise schedule β1 = 10 −4 to βT = 2 × 10 −2 with T = 100 .The model ϵθ predicts the injected noise: 

L = Ea0,t,ϵ 

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ (at, t, c )∥2i

. (7) Inference uses deterministic DDIM sampling [13] with 10 denoising steps, balancing stability and latency. 

4) Transformer Architecture: FlowDiT adopts a Diffu-sion Transformer (DiT) architecture [14] with 8 transformer blocks, hidden dimension 512, 8 attention heads, and horizon tokenization over H = 8 timesteps. Each action timestep is embedded as a token. Conditioning is injected through adaLN-Zero modulation. In each block, the timestep embedding t and condition vector c are processed through an MLP: 

(γ, β, g ) = MLP( c, t ), (8) which modulates LayerNorm activations as: 

LN( h) → g · (γ ⊙ LN( h) + β). (9) This conditioning mechanism avoids concatenating c to every token and preserves architectural efficiency. 

5) Closed-Loop Execution and Stability: During deploy-ment, FlowDiT supports both closed-loop and open-loop 

execution. In both modes, it operates in a model-predictive manner: (1) encode Vgoal and (if available) It; (2) predict action block at:t+7 ; (3) execute only at; (4) advance to t + 1 

and repeat. In open-loop mode, It is omitted and the policy relies entirely on the reference video and language condi-tioning, enabling deployment on platforms where streaming camera feedback is impractical. This receding-horizon strategy stabilizes control under visual perturbations and minor trajectory drift. Empirically, the system runs at ∼20 ms per step on an RTX 5090, achieving 40–47 Hz closed-loop frequency. 

6) Parameter Efficiency: FlowDiT leverages a frozen DI-NOv2 encoder (86.6M parameters) and a frozen CLIP en-coder, training only 43M parameters within the DiT module (including the 5.2M learned flow encoder). This separation maintains representation richness while keeping trainable capacity compact, yielding a 161 × reduction relative to end-to-end VLA models with billions of parameters. IV. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP 

A. Task Suite and Embodiments 

We evaluate Action Agent across 50 first-person naviga-tion tasks in indoor environments including warehouses and hospital corridors. Each task consists of a natural language instruction, an initial first-person observation, and a prede-fined success condition based on goal proximity and stable stopping. The task suite includes 15 straight-line tasks, 16 obstacle-avoidance tasks, 10 path-following tasks, and 9 orientation or turning tasks. To evaluate cross-embodiment generalization, we deploy Action Agent on three distinct robotic platforms.The three evaluation embodiments are shown in Fig.4:  

> •

Unitree G1 Humanoid (Real Hardware): We deploy Action Agent on a Unitree G1 humanoid using a head-mounted RGB camera (approximately 1.2 m height) to Fig. 4: Robot embodiments used for FlowDit evaluation: a quadrotor drone (Isaac Sim), a Unitree G1 humanoid (real hardware), a wheeled mobile robot (Isaac Sim). 

capture the initial observation I0 for Stage I. The result-ing velocity commands are executed on the robot open-loop (i.e., without live RGB feedback during motion). We evaluate task completion across 17 trials in unseen indoor lab/office environments. Success is defined as reaching the intended goal region or completing the traversal without obstacle collision; 11 of 17 trials succeed ( 64.7% ).  

> •

Quadrotor Drone (Isaac Sim): 13 tasks involving for-ward motion, altitude adjustments, and banking turns.  

> •

Wheeled Mobile Robot (Isaac Sim): 12 tasks with planar differential drive kinematics. All embodiments use the same Stage I video generation pipeline and the same FlowDiT controller, without retraining per embodiment. 

B. Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate both Stage I (video synthesis) and Stage II (navigation execution). 

a) Stage I Metrics.: Each generated reference video is scored by the evaluator:  

> •

Prompt Adherence (PA) : alignment with instruction.  

> •

Physical Plausibility (PP) : motion realism and colli-sion avoidance.  

> •

Visual Quality (VQ) : temporal and perceptual coher-ence. A video is considered valid if mean( PA , PP , VQ ) ≥ 80 .

b) Stage II Metrics.: For simulation, we report success rate (SR), mean Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE), and Direc-tion Accuracy (DA). For real-robot experiments, we report task completion rate across trials in unseen environments. 

C. Training 

FlowDiT follows a two-stage training strategy. We first pretrain on the RECON dataset [37] from the Open X-Embodiment collection, which provides 11,830 outdoor nav-igation episodes collected on a Clearpath Jackal wheeled robot with scripted exploration. This pretraining stage allows FlowDiT to learn general visual navigation priors, like scene understanding, obstacle avoidance patterns, and ego-motion representation, from a large and diverse outdoor dataset. We then fine-tune on Unitree G1 humanoid navigation episodes (162 train / 41 val) collected in Isaac Sim indoor environments (warehouse and hospital corridors). This fine-tuning stage calibrates the velocity output dynamics to match the G1 humanoid’s motion characteristics, enabling accurate video-to-action velocity transfer for real-world deployment. The fine-tuning configuration is summarized in Table I.                         

> TABLE I: Fine-Tuning Configuration (G1 Sim →Real)
> Episodes 203 (162 train / 41 val) Frame Resolution 224 ×224 RGB Action Horizon H= 8
> Action Space [−1,1] 3normalized velocities Optimizer AdamW (LR 1e −4)Batch Size 8 (FP16) Noise Schedule Linear β1= 10 −4to βT= 2 ×10 −2
> Diffusion Steps 100 (train) / 10 (DDIM infer) Trainable Params ≈43M Hardware NVIDIA RTX 5090 (32 GB)

D. Baselines 

We compare FlowDiT against representative navigation baselines. We note that published baseline numbers are evalu-ated on the RECON outdoor dataset with different robots and success criteria; the comparison is for architectural context 

rather than direct benchmarking.  

> •

ViNT [24] (vision transformer navigation)  

> •

NoMaD [16] (goal-conditioned diffusion navigation)  

> •

OpenVLA [4] (foundation VLA model)  

> •

Vision-only Diffusion (ours, no optical flow) V. R ESULTS 

A. Stage I: Agentic Synthesis Reliability 

The introduction of an agentic optimization loop signifi-cantly improves the reliability of navigation video synthesis. While single-shot generation without optimization succeeds in only 35% of tasks, the full Action Agent framework achieves an 86% overall success rate across all embodiments, as shown in Table II.                 

> TABLE II: Trajectory Synthesis Performance by Embodiment
> Embodiment Pass PA PP VQ Unitree G1 (Real) 92% 92.3 91.5 93.1 Drone (Sim) 77% 84.6 82.3 88.1 Mobile Robot (Sim) 83% 87.5 85.8 89.2

1) Convergence and Memory Impact: The agentic opti-mization loop demonstrates steady convergence, with mean scores (PA, PP, VQ) progressing from 65.0 at iteration 1 to 87.0 at iteration 5. The inclusion of long-term memory is critical; it reduces the average number of iterations from 4.8 to 3.5 while increasing the overall success rate by 14%. 

B. Stage II: Navigation Performance 1) Baseline Comparisons: We evaluate FlowDiT against state-of-the-art navigation and Vision-Language-Action (VLA) baselines. As detailed in Table III, FlowDiT achieves a 73.2% success rate in simulation with 161 ×

fewer trainable parameters than OpenVLA [4]. Although datasets and environments differ across methods (see Table III caption), the comparison demonstrates that conditioning a lightweight diffusion policy on explicit visual and motion representations is competitive with end-to-end, billion-parameter models. TABLE III: Architectural Comparison. †Published on RECON (out-door, different robots/criteria). ‡Measured on G1 val (41 episodes, simulation, with post-processing).                                                

> Method Flow Params SR (%) Data ViNT [24] No ∼25M 61 †RECON NoMaD [16] No ∼100M 68 †RECON OpenVLA [4] No ∼7B 65 †Mixed
> FlowDiT (Ours) Yes 43M 73.2 ‡G1 sim
> FlowDiT (real) Yes 43M 64.7 G1 real
> TABLE IV: Ablation study on modality contributions. G1 val split (41 episodes), with post-processing. All variants use the same checkpoint; features zeroed at inference.
> Variant Components SR (%) ATE (m) DA (%) Vision-only DINOv2 58.5 0.298 73.0 No flow DINOv2+CLIP 73.2 0.309 67.8 No language DINOv2+Flow 65.9 0.280 80.6
> Full FlowDiT All three 73.4 0.293 76.1
> Real robot (17 trials, open-loop) 64.7 ——

2) Real-Hardware Transfer (Unitree G1): To evaluate zero-shot transferability, we deployed Action Agent on a physical Unitree G1 in unseen indoor lab/office environ-ments. Each trial followed the full pipeline: capture I0 from the robot’s camera, generate a navigation video via Stage I given a language instruction (e.g., “walk toward the table”, “Maps to the corridor end”, “move past the shelf and turn right”), extract velocity commands via FlowDiT, and execute open-loop (no RGB feedback). Success is task completion: reaching the goal region or collision-free traversal. Across 17 trials, 11 succeeded (64.7%) .The six failures stem from three open-loop-specific modes: (i) video-to-metric scale ambiguity (most frequent) the gen-erated video implies a motion magnitude mismatched with actual robot displacement; (ii) trajectory divergence small heading errors compound without correction; (iii) obstacle collision from accumulated drift. These do not reflect errors in the generated trajectory: Stage I consistently produces topologically correct paths. Closed-loop execution, condi-tioning on live It at 40–47 Hz for online correction and visual arrival detection, is expected to address all three modes. 

C. Ablation Study: Disentangling Modality Contributions 

To understand the specific contributions of our multi-modal conditioning, we conducted an ablation study on the G1 simulation validation split (41 episodes, with post-processing). All variants use the same trained checkpoint; individual modality features are zeroed at inference to isolate their contribution. Results are shown in Table IV. 

Flow improves direction accuracy: Removing the learned flow encoder drops Direction Accuracy from 76.1% to 67.8% ( −8.3%), confirming that optical flow is critical for directional disambiguation. Without flow, FlowDiT relies solely on semantic vision, which struggles with “looming” depth ambiguities and estimating the temporal proximity of approaching obstacles. 

Language enables goal discrimination: Removing the CLIP language embedding reduces SR from 73.4% to 65.9%. In these trials, FlowDiT successfully followed the visual trajectory of the reference video but frequently failed to execute semantic stopping , either overshooting the goal or stopping at incorrect landmarks. 

Vision-only baseline: Using only DINOv2 features (no flow, no language) yields the lowest SR at 58.5%, demon-strating that both modalities provide complementary infor-mation essential for robust navigation. 

D. System Efficiency and High-Frequency Execution 

A critical limitation of end-to-end VLA models is their immense parameter count (e.g., 7B for OpenVLA), which precludes high-frequency control on standard hardware. FlowDiT generates 121 velocity waypoints from a single reference video in 3.68 s average inference time on an RTX 5090, running at 40–47 Hz ( ∼20 ms/step). The 43M trainable parameters represent a 161 × reduction vs. Open-VLA. Post-processing (EMA smoothing, velocity clamping, yaw scaling) is applied to diffusion outputs before execution. VI. D ISCUSSION 

Our results demonstrate explicitly decoupling trajectory imagination from low-level execution yields substantial im-provements in cross-embodiment transfer. Generative video, refined through an agentic loop, acts as a universal, high-bandwidth Visual Intermediate Representation (VIR) between semantic reasoning and metric control. Furthermore, ex-plicitly injecting ego-motion constraints via learned optical flow resolves the “looming” depth ambiguities that static semantic encoders struggle to process, while the diffusion policy naturally captures multi-modal action distributions. 

Video-to-Action Transfer: The two-stage training strat-egy (pretraining on RECON’s large-scale outdoor data fol-lowed by fine-tuning on 203 G1 simulation episodes) enables effective video-to-action transfer. The RECON pretraining provides general navigation priors, while the Isaac Sim fine-tuning calibrates velocity dynamics to the humanoid em-bodiment. This calibration is critical: the real-robot success rate of 64.7% on task completion in unseen environments demonstrates that the sim-to-real velocity transfer is viable, with a gap of only ∼8.5% relative to simulation. 

Hardware Transfer and the Metric-Semantic Gap: 

The open-loop hardware study revealed the video-to-metric scale ambiguity : without online observation feedback, minor mismatches between generated pixel-space motion and real-world displacement accumulate into trajectory drift. Notably, FlowDiT still succeeds in the majority of open-loop trials, demonstrating that the reference video alone carries sub-stantial navigational information. Engaging the closed-loop variant, conditioning on live observations It, is expected to further improve robustness by dynamically grounding semantic imagination into metric reality. 

Controllers for World Models: As foundation video models scale into general-purpose “World Models” capable of simulating complex physics, they still lack native inter-faces for physical robotic embodiment. Action Agent bridges this gap. By utilizing an LLM as a meta-optimizer in Stage I, we provide a mechanism to steer and validate these world models for specific task constraints. As generative video models improve in latency and physical realism, the Action Agent architecture will directly inherit these capabilities, fur-ther reducing the sim-to-real gap without requiring retraining of the Stage II control policy. Despite these advantages, the system exhibits some limi-tations. FlowDiT experiences elevated failure rates in highly constrained spaces, such as narrow doorframes, where centimeter-level precision is required. Additionally, current video generation architectures limit clip durations to 5–15 s, constraining the horizon of single-stage planning. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We introduced Action Agent, a two-stage framework that unifies agentic video synthesis with flow-constrained diffu-sion for embodied robot navigation. Pretrained on RECON and fine-tuned on 203 Unitree G1 simulation episodes to cal-ibrate velocity dynamics, a single 43M-parameter FlowDiT checkpoint achieves 73.2% navigation success in simulation and 64.7% task completion on a real Unitree G1 humanoid in unseen indoor environments under open-loop execution. Action Agent provides a highly efficient, embodiment-aware paradigm for grounding visual foundation models into phys-ical action. Future work explores receding-horizon video generation, closed-loop hardware validation, and aerial training data. REFERENCES [1] H. Durrant-Whyte and T. Bailey, “Simultaneous localisation and mapping (slam): Part i the essential algorithms,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 99–110, 2006. [2] B. Paden, M. ˇC´ ap, S. Z. Yong, D. Yershov, and E. Frazzoli, “A survey of motion planning and control techniques for self-driving urban vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 33–55, 2016. [3] A. Hussein, M. M. Gaber, E. Elyan, and C. Jayne, “Imitation learning: A survey of learning methods,” ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 21:1–21:35, 2017. [4] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. Foster, G. Lam, P. Sanketi, et al. , “Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model,” 2024, arXiv:2406.09246. [5] E. Collaboration, A. O’Neill, A. Rehman, A. Gupta, A. Maddukuri, A. Gupta, A. Padalkar, A. Lee, A. Pooley, and A. G. and, “Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models,” 2023, arXiv:2310.08864. [6] A. Blattmann, T. Dockhorn, S. Kulal, D. Mendelevitch, M. Kilian, D. Lorenz, Y. Levi, Z. English, V. Voleti, A. Letts, V. Jampani, and R. Rombach, “Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets,” 2023, arXiv:2311.15127. [7] NVIDIA, :, N. Agarwal, A. Ali, M. Bala, Y. Balaji, E. Barker, T. Cai, P. Chattopadhyay, Y. Chen, Y. Cui, et al. , “Cosmos: A world foundation model platform for physical ai,” 2025, arXiv:2501.03575. [8] M. Oquab, T. Darcet, T. Moutakanni, H. Vo, M. Szafraniec, V. Khali-dov, P. Fernandez, D. Haziza, F. Massa, A. El-Nouby, M. Assran, N. Ballas, W. Galuba, R. Howes, P.-Y. Huang, S. Li, I. Misra, M. Rabbat, V. Sharma, G. Synnaeve, H. Xu, H. Jegou, P. Labatut, and A. Joulin, “Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision,” 2023, arXiv:2304.07193. [9] Z. Teed and J. Deng, “Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow,” in Proc. European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,2020. [10] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever, “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-sion,” in Proc. of the 38th Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML) ,2021. [11] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, B. David, C. Finn, C. Fu, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman, et al. , “Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances,” 2022, arXiv:2204.01691. [12] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” 2020, arXiv:2006.11239. [13] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2021. [14] W. Peebles and S. Xie, “Scalable diffusion models with transformers,” in Proc. of the IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2023. [15] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” 2023, arXiv:2303.04137. [16] A. Sridhar, D. Shah, N. Dashora, and S. Levine, “Nomad: Goal masked diffusion policies for navigation and exploration,” 2023, arXiv:2310.07896. [17] B. K. P. Horn and B. G. Schunck, “Determining optical flow,” in 

Artificial Intelligence , vol. 17, no. 1–3, 1981, pp. 185–203. [18] B. D. Lucas and T. Kanade, “An iterative image registration technique with an application to stereo vision,” in Proc. of the 7th Int. Joint Conf. on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 1981, pp. 674–679. [19] M. Argus, L. Hermann, J. Long, and T. Brox, “Flowcontrol: Optical flow based visual servoing,” 2020, arXiv:2007.00291. [20] P. Katara, U. Hagg, M. Watter, B. Sch¨ olkopf, J. Peters, and G. Martius, “Deep model predictive control for visual servoing,” in Proc. of the 38th Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2021. [21] Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, X. Wang, Y. Li, T. Chen, M. Xia, P. Luo, and Y. Shan, “A unified and flexible motion controller for video generation,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , 2024. [22] J. Liang et al. , “Motion-aware video generation with diffusion model,” in Proc. European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. [23] S. Thrun, W. Burgard, and D. Fox, Probabilistic Robotics . MIT Press, 2005. [24] D. Shah, A. Sridhar, and S. Levine, “Vint: A foundation model for visual navigation,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research (PMLR) , 2023. [25] Z. Huang et al. , “A survey of imitation learning methods, environments and applications,” 2024, arXiv:2404.19456. [26] Y. Du et al. , “Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation,” 2023, arXiv:2302.00111. [27] Runway Research, “Gen-2: Generate novel videos with text, images or video clips,” https://runwayml.com/research/gen-2, 2023, accessed: 2026-03-03. [28] S. Reed et al. , “A generalist agent,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2022. [29] J. Liang, W. Huang, Y. Chen, A. Gupta, et al. , “Code as poli-cies: Language model programs for embodied control,” 2022, arXiv:2209.07753. [30] A. Madaan, N. Tandon, P. Gupta, S. Hallinan, L. Gao, S. Wiegreffe, U. Alon, N. Dziri, S. Prabhumoye, Y. Yang, S. Gupta, B. P. Majumder, K. Hermann, S. Welleck, A. Yazdanbakhsh, and P. Clark, “Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback,” in NeurIPS , 2023. [31] W. Huang, P. Abbeel, et al. , “Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through planning with language models,” 2022, arXiv:2207.05608. [32] I. Singh, V. Blukis, A. Mousavian, A. Goyal, et al. , “Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using large language models,” in 

Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023. [33] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. P. Xing, H. Zhang, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica, “Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena,” in 

NeurIPS , 2023. [34] S. Bai, Y. Cai, R. Chen, K. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Cheng, L. Deng, W. Ding, C. Gao, C. Ge, et al. , “Qwen3-VL technical report,” 2025, arXiv:2511.21631. [35] Team Wan, A. Wang, B. Ai, B. Wen, et al. , “Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models,” 2025, arXiv:2503.20314. [36] Y. HaCohen, N. Chiprut, B. Brazowski, D. Shalem, D. Moshe, E. Richardson, E. Levin, G. Shiran, N. Zabari, O. Gordon, et al. , “LTX-Video: Realtime video latent diffusion,” 2024, arXiv:2501.00103. [37] D. Shah, B. Eysenbach, N. Rhinehart, and S. Levine, “Rapid Exploration for Open-World Navigation with Latent Goal Models,” in 

5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2021. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=d SWJhyKfVw