Title: HAAS: A Policy-Aware Framework for Adaptive Task Allocation Between Humans and Artificial Intelligence Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02832v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 02:27:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 57

Markdown Content:
# HAAS: A Policy-Aware Framework for Adaptive Task Allocation Between Humans and Artificial Intelligence Systems ⋆

Vicente Pelechano a, ∗, Antoni Mestre a, Manoli Albert a, Miriam Gil b

> a

Valencian Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence (VRAIN), Universitat Politècnica de València, Camino de Vera s/n, Valencia, Spain 

> b

Departament d’Informàtica, Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain 

Abstract 

Deciding how to distribute work between humans and artificial intelligence sys-tems is a central challenge in organisational design. Most existing approaches treat this as a binary choice, yet the operational reality is richer: humans and artificial intelligence systems routinely share tasks or take complementary roles depending on context, fatigue, and the stakes involved. Governing that distribution — balancing efficiency, oversight, and human capability — remains an open problem. This paper presents Human–Artificial-Intelligence Adaptive Symbiosis (HAAS ), an implemented intelligent allocation framework for adaptive task allocation in software engineering and manufacturing. The framework com-bines two coupled artificial intelligence components: a rule-based expert system that enforces governance constraints before any learning occurs, and a contextual-bandit learner that selects among feasible collaboration modes from outcome feedback. Task–agent fit is represented through five auditable cognitive dimensions and a five-mode autonomy spectrum — from human-only to fully autonomous — embedded in a reproducible benchmark spanning 

> ⋆

This work has been submitted to Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence for possible open-access publication. 

> ∗

Corresponding author. Camino de Vera s/n, Universitat Politècnica de València, Valencia, Spain, E-46022. 

Email addresses: pele@vrain.upv.es (Vicente Pelechano), anmesgas@upv.es 

(Antoni Mestre), malbert@vrain.upv.es (Manoli Albert), miriam.gil@uv.es (Miriam Gil) 

> arXiv:2605.02832v1 [cs.AI] 4 May 2026

software-engineering and manufacturing domains. Three empirical findings emerge. First, governance is not a binary switch but a tunable design variable: tighter constraints predictably convert au-tonomous artificial intelligence assignments into supervised collaborations, with domain-specific costs and benefits. Second, in manufacturing, stronger governance can improve operational performance and reduce fatigue simulta-neously — a workload-buffering effect that runs counter to the usual framing of governance as pure overhead. Third, no single governance setting domi-nates across all tested contexts; moderate governance becomes increasingly competitive as the learner accumulates experience within the governed action space. Together, these findings position HAAS as a pre-deployment work-bench for comparing and inspecting human–artificial-intelligence allocation policies before organisational commitment. 

Keywords: human–artificial-intelligence collaboration, rule-based expert systems, contextual-bandit learning, adaptive task allocation, software engineering, manufacturing operations, decision support systems, governance-aware allocation, industrial simulation 

1. Introduction 

As AI capabilities are embedded more deeply into organisational workflows, work design increasingly depends on decisions about how tasks, authority, and responsibility should be distributed between human agents and AI systems. This is a long-standing question in human–computer interaction and oper-ations management, but it now arises in a broader and more operationally consequential form because AI is no longer confined to isolated tools. Con-temporary practice still often frames the issue as a binary choice — either a human performs a task, or an AI does — yet the operational reality is considerably richer. A software engineer may lead the design of an algorithm while an AI assistant generates candidate implementations; a manufacturing technician may supervise a cobot that executes repetitive assembly steps while retaining veto authority over safety-critical decisions. These shared 

execution modes are poorly captured by existing task allocation frameworks, which rarely model governance constraints, human fatigue, or the progressive erosion of human skill that occurs with sustained AI delegation. Critically, the problem of Human–AI task allocation is not simply one of optimising throughput. Regulatory frameworks such as the EU AI Act (Eu-2ropean Parliament and Council of the European Union, 2024) impose human oversight requirements for high-risk applications, and collaborative robotics standards specify explicit authority boundaries in shared workspaces (In-ternational Organization for Standardization, 2011, 2016). Sustained AI delegation also risks automation complacency and skill erosion (Bainbridge, 1983; Parasuraman and Manzey, 2010), undermining the human capacity to detect failures and recover from disruptions. And simply adding a human review step does not guarantee better outcomes: a meta-analysis of 106 ex-periments found that Human–AI combinations often underperform the better standalone agent, especially on decision tasks (Vaccaro et al., 2024). The design question HAAS addresses is therefore how to govern task allocation so that efficiency, human oversight, and capability-retention requirements can be audited, tuned, and evaluated jointly under explicit trade-offs. This paper introduces HAAS (Human–AI Adaptive Symbiosis), an intelli-gent allocation framework that implements governed subtask allocation and packages it as a reproducible benchmarking engine for applied Human–AI work design. HAAS makes four primary contributions: 1. A task-representation instrument for applied allocation. Each subtask is characterised along five auditable dimensions — repetitiveness, technical depth, creativity, ambiguity, and human interaction — yielding a continuous AI affinity signal grounded in cognitive task analysis and suitable for operational allocation. 2. A five-mode execution model for expert work. Rather than a binary human/AI assignment, HAAS defines five collaboration modes (Human-Only , Copilot , Peer , Supervised , Autonomous ) that cover the full range from complete human autonomy to complete AI delegation, including three intermediate shared modes with explicit human and AI participation shares. 3. A policy-aware allocation engine with human-state dynamics. 

Allocation decisions are produced by a contextual bandit that selects among feasible collaboration modes from outcome feedback, subject to a governance layer ( PolicyEngine ) that enforces organisational constraints such as autonomy caps, mandatory human validation steps, and safety-critical overrides. Human-state dynamics — fatigue, trust, and deskilling — are embedded directly in the reward signal, so the engine adapts to the evolving human capacity over time. 4. A reproducible cross-domain simulation benchmark. The al-3location engine is packaged as a configurable benchmarking artefact spanning software engineering and manufacturing domains, enabling comparative evaluation of learned, heuristic, and fixed policies under explicit governance contracts before organisational deployment. Taken together, these contributions make HAAS both a framework for designing governance-constrained Human–AI work and a reproducible work-bench for evaluating it. We therefore examine three empirical questions: (i) which allocation strategy performs best in the audited standard scenarios? (ii ) how does governance intensity change overall performance and the mix of collaboration modes? And ( iii ) how well do effective governance settings and learned allocation patterns transfer across scenarios, domains, and longer horizons? From an expert-systems perspective, the PolicyEngine is consistent with classical forward-chaining knowledge bases (Turban, 1992; Giarratano and Riley, 1994; Liao, 2005), augmented with contextual-bandit learning within governance-defined bounds (details in Section 3.4). The remainder of the paper situates HAAS in the literature, develops the framework and benchmark, reports empirical results, and closes with implications and limitations. 

2. Background and Related Work 

Three strands of prior work are especially important for HAAS : research on Human–AI teaming clarifies the allocation problem, bandit-based learn-ing provides the adaptive mechanism, and governance-oriented AI research motivates the explicit rule layer that constrains learning. 

2.1. Human–AI Teaming and Task Allocation 

Understanding how to allocate work between humans and AI systems requires situating HAAS within two converging bodies of literature: the classical human–automation tradition, which established the conceptual foun-dations for function allocation, and the empirical literature on AI-augmented knowledge work, which quantifies the productive impact of contemporary AI tools in real workflows. The theoretical roots of Human–AI work allocation trace back to Fitts (1951), whose MABA-MABA lists (“Men Are Better At / Machines Are Better At”) established the principle of comparative advantage as the basis for function allocation between humans and machines. Sheridan (1992) later 4formalised a levels of automation scale ranging from full human control to full computer control, and Parasuraman et al. (2000) extended this into a four-stage taxonomy covering information acquisition, information analysis, decision selection, and action implementation, arguing that appropriate au-tomation levels depend on system reliability and human workload. Empirical work by Endsley and Kaber (1999) and Kaber and Endsley (2004) showed that intermediate automation levels often optimise both performance and situation awareness, providing an early evidence base for the graduated autonomy approach we operationalise here. Human–AI teaming research has extended these ideas to AI-augmented knowledge work and machines-as-teammates agendas (Cummings, 2014; Mc-Neese et al., 2018; Seeber et al., 2020), emphasising the role of trust, situation awareness, and complementarity between human and AI capabilities (Bansal et al., 2021; Hemmer et al., 2021). Design guidelines for effective Human–AI interaction (Amershi et al., 2019) have further codified principles such as supporting efficient correction and making clear what the system can do. At the same time, achieving genuine complementarity in Human–AI teams requires deliberate design: simply adding a human or an AI to the loop does not guarantee better outcomes (Kamar, 2016; Bansal et al., 2021). Recent work argues that complementarity depends on explicit role partitioning, trust calibration, shared mental models, and escalation structures rather than on nominal human presence alone (Gonzalez et al., 2026), and the meta-analysis by Vaccaro et al. (2024) confirms that Human–AI combinations do not reliably outperform the better standalone agent, especially in decision-making tasks. For allocation research, the implication is direct: the benefit of Human–AI collaboration depends on how work is decomposed and governed, not merely on adding a human review step to an AI pipeline. Field experiments with large language models show that GenAI substantially raises productivity in writing (Noy and Zhang, 2023) and consulting tasks (Dell’Acqua et al., 2023), and reduces task completion time for software developers by over 50% (Peng et al., 2023). Crucially, Dell’Acqua et al. (2023) report a jagged frontier :AI outperforms humans on some tasks while underperforming on others, reinforcing the need for dynamic, task-level allocation rather than blanket automation. Raisch and Krakowski (2021) frame this as the automation– augmentation paradox: the same AI capability that increases efficiency may simultaneously erode the human expertise required to govern, audit, and correct it. HAAS translates this insight into practice by treating the jagged frontier as a design parameter rather than a fixed obstacle: it provides a 5systematic, pre-deployment way to identify which tasks belong on each side of the frontier under a given governance contract. Translating these principles to autonomous Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) requires explicit design of the human integration itself. Gil et al. (2019) characterise the technological challenges of integrating humans into the CPS autonomy loop and propose a conceptual framework — validated on an au-tonomous vehicle prototype — for specifying how humans and autonomous systems should cooperate, making explicit role assignments and participation boundaries that HAAS extends to the task-allocation level. In human–robot collaboration, adaptive task-allocation frameworks have moved beyond static role assignment: recent work models trust (Ali et al., 2022), adapts assign-ments via augmented reality and digital twins (Petzoldt et al., 2025), responds to operator fatigue or stress (Urrea, 2025; Kirgil-Budakli et al., 2025), and incorporates worker preferences via reinforcement learning (Wang et al., 2025). Table 1 positions HAAS relative to these studies; the key differences are the explicit five-mode autonomy vocabulary, the separate governance layer, and the cross-domain reproducible benchmark. The broader paradigm motivating this work is Hybrid Intelligence : the design of Human–AI systems in which humans and AI complement each other so that the team achieves outcomes neither could reach independently, while humans retain authority over goals and values (Dellermann et al., 2019). 

HAAS operationalises this paradigm at the task-allocation level: rather than choosing a single automation level for a workflow, it governs the conditions under which each collaboration mode is appropriate, ensuring that efficiency gains and human capability are co-optimised rather than traded off. Despite this progress, most allocation proposals still optimise a single workflow or local productivity/ergonomics objective. They rarely provide all of the following together: ( i ) an explicit rule layer for governance; ( ii ) a graded autonomy vocabulary beyond binary assignment; and ( iii ) a reproducible cross-domain benchmark for pre-deployment policy analysis. This combined gap is what HAAS addresses. 

2.2. Learning-Based Allocation Strategies 

A policy-aware allocation engine must not only encode domain knowledge but also adapt to outcome feedback as the task mix and human state evolve over time. This requirement points to sequential decision-making methods that balance exploration of uncertain allocation options with exploitation of accumulated experience. 6Sequential decision-making under uncertainty has been formalised through the multi-armed bandit (MAB) paradigm (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020). UCB-based algorithms (Auer et al., 2002) balance exploration and exploita-tion through optimistic upper confidence bounds on estimated arm rewards. LinUCB (Li et al., 2010) extends this to contextual settings where side infor-mation (here, the cognitive dimensions of a subtask) is available, making it a natural fit for task-heterogeneous workflows. Thompson Sampling (Russo et al., 2018) offers a Bayesian alternative that has shown competitive regret in practice. A contextual-bandit formulation is appropriate here because each alloca-tion decision is made at the subtask level and receives immediate evaluative feedback after execution, while governance rules externally restrict the feasible action set. Supervised learning would require labelled “optimal” allocations that are not available ex ante, and a full reinforcement-learning formulation would introduce state-transition modelling and long-horizon credit assignment beyond what this benchmark is designed to estimate. We therefore adopt the simplest online-learning model that can exploit task context, learn from partial feedback, and remain auditable under explicit policy constraints. The discounted-UCB variant (Garivier and Moulines, 2011) addresses non-stationary environments by exponentially down-weighting historical rewards — a natural fit for workflows where task mix and human state evolve over time. Applications of bandits to workload management and scheduling exist in manufacturing (Gijsbrechts et al., 2022) and sequential resource allocation more broadly (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020), but rarely incorporate human well-being metrics or governance constraints as part of the reward signal. 

HAAS treats fatigue and deskilling as first-class outcomes alongside efficiency and quality, embedding them directly in the bandit reward signal. 

2.3. Governance and Responsible AI in Work Systems 

Even a technically optimal allocation policy is insufficient for deployment if it operates without organisational constraints. Responsible AI deployment in work systems requires mechanisms that preserve human oversight, calibrate trust appropriately, and comply with regulatory and safety obligations. This subsection reviews the governance and responsible AI literature that motivates the PolicyEngine component of HAAS .A recurrent idea in responsible AI is that HITL arrangements should preserve active human involvement in the workflow, especially in high-stakes settings (Monarch, 2021). But keeping HITL is not enough by itself. What 7also matters is appropriate reliance (Lee and See, 2004): people should neither over-trust nor unnecessarily reject AI support. Buçinca et al. (2021) show empirically that people over-rely on AI recommendations even when those rec-ommendations are wrong, and that cognitive forcing interventions can partially mitigate this bias. Regulatory frameworks such as the EU AI Act (European Parliament and Council of the European Union, 2024) impose transparency and human oversight obligations for high-risk AI applications; collaborative robotics standards (International Organization for Standardization, 2011, 2016) specify authority boundaries for shared workspaces; and human-centred AI guidelines (Amershi et al., 2019; Shneiderman, 2022) codify principles for effective human oversight of AI decisions. In parallel, explainability research emphasises that useful explanations are social and context-dependent rather than mere exposure of internal model logic, which matters directly for cal-ibrated reliance in AI-supported decisions (Miller, 2019). One systematic review of adaptive autonomy synthesises a decade of human factors research and shows that the literature remains fragmented with respect to adaptation triggers, evaluation criteria, and operational design choices (Hauptman et al., 2024). The adaptive automation literature (Inagaki, 2003; Kaber and Endsley, 2004) offers an important precedent: systems that dynamically shift au-tomation levels in response to operator state (workload, fatigue, situation awareness) have been studied since the 1990s. HAAS extends this idea to LLM-era AI capabilities and explicit organisational governance. Existing HITL approaches, however, are predominantly architectural — they specify 

where humans should be in the loop but not how the loop should adapt dynamically to task mix, fatigue, or strategic priorities. Our PolicyEngine 

operationalises governance as a set of evaluable rules that constrain, but do not replace, the learning-based allocator. To our knowledge, HAAS is among the first frameworks to jointly provide: ( i) a graded five-mode autonomy vocabulary for knowledge-work allocation; ( ii ) an editable rule-based gover-nance layer that is structurally prior to the adaptive learner; ( iii ) explicit human-state dynamics (fatigue, trust, deskilling) embedded directly in the reward signal; and ( iv ) a reproducible cross-domain benchmark spanning software engineering and manufacturing. Table 1 makes the positioning claim explicit. Prior studies treat allocation as adaptive but typically operate within a single embodied workflow, encode autonomy only implicitly, lack a separate governance layer, and do not provide reproducible multi-domain benchmarks. HAAS differs on all four dimensions. 8Table 1: Comparison of HAAS with representative allocation studies along the dimensions most relevant to this paper.                               

> Study Adaptive alloc. Autonomy model Governance layer Human factors modelled Repro-ducible Evaluation scope
> Ali et al. (2022) yes not explicit no separate layer trust no single HRC team Petzoldt et al. (2025) yes workflow-specific not explicit worker performance no single assembly Urrea (2025) yes not explicit not explicit fatigue + skill no single HRC sim. Wang et al. (2025) yes not explicit not explicit worker preference no single assembly
> HAAS (this paper) yes five modes explicit rule layer fatigue + trust + deskilling yes cross-domain benchmark

“Governance layer” refers to a distinct, editable rule layer rather than implicit safety logic or embodied constraints. “Reproducible” indicates fixed seeds, published parameter tables, and a command-line benchmark runner. 

3. The HAAS Framework 

HAAS is organised into three layers (Figure 1). Layer 1 scores each subtask on five cognitive dimensions. Layer 2 is the allocation engine: the 

PolicyEngine applies governance constraints first, then the bandit selects among the remaining feasible modes. Layer 3 maps the decision to one of five collaboration modes, tracks outcomes, and updates human state, feeding back into the next cycle. The key design principle is that governance is applied before the bandit observes the reward signal, so learned behaviour always operates within organisationally acceptable bounds. Throughout the framework and experiments, the atomic allocation unit is the subtask ;we retain task as a generic umbrella term and task type for the class label attached to a subtask in the benchmark catalogue. The remainder of this section details each component in turn: cognitive characterisation and affinity scoring (Sections 3.1 and 3.2), collaboration modes (Section 3.3), the allocation engine (Section 3.4), the execution loop (Section 3.5), and the human-state model (Section 3.6). 

3.1. Cognitive Characterisation of Subtasks 

Each subtask must be characterised in a way that makes its suitability for human or AI execution explicit and computable. HAAS uses a five-dimension scoring instrument grounded in cognitive task analysis (Crandall et al., 2006) and the four-stage automation taxonomy of Parasuraman et al. 9Cognitive characterisation (5 dimensions) 

PolicyEngine (governance rules) 

Bandit allocator (UCB1 / LinUCB / TS) 

Execution & outcome (5 collaboration modes) 

Human state (fatigue, trust, skill) 

> Layer 1: Characterisation
> Layer 2: Allocation engine
> Layer 3: Execution
> feasible set
> allocation decision
> state update
> human-state context
> reward

Figure 1: Three-layer architecture of HAAS . The governance layer filters feasible collabo-ration modes before the bandit selects an allocation; execution outcomes then update both reward and human state for the next cycle. 

(2000), translating qualitative task properties into a continuous AI affinity score. Each subtask s is characterised by a vector d(s) = ( r, τ, c, a, h ) ∈ [0 , 1] 5 of rubric-based scores assigned on a common normalised 0–1 scale, where: 

• r — repetitiveness : the degree to which the subtask is mechanical, templated, or rule-governed; 

• τ — technical depth : the level of domain expertise required for competent execution; 

• c — creativity : the degree to which the subtask demands novel problem-solving or aesthetic judgement; 

• a — ambiguity : the extent to which requirements or success criteria are underspecified; 

• h — human interaction : the degree to which the subtask requires interpersonal communication, negotiation, or empathy. From these five dimensions we derive a scalar AI affinity :

αAI (s) = wr r + wτ τ + wc (1 − c) + wa (1 − a) + wh (1 − h) (1) 10 Table 2: Representative software (SW) and manufacturing (MF) subtasks, ordered by AI affinity αAI (Equation (1)). Dom. Subtask Task Type r τ c a h αAI Constraint 

Human-centric (αAI < 0.45 )

SW Stakeholder Interview Req. Analysis 0.15 0.25 0.55 0.80 0.95 0.23 —MF Safety Incident Mgmt. Safety Superv. 0.05 0.55 0.65 0.90 0.95 0.24 Human-Only 

SW Root-Cause Analysis Debugging 0.10 0.85 0.70 0.65 0.50 0.39 —MF Defect Analysis Quality Insp. 0.20 0.70 0.60 0.70 0.55 0.40 —

Balanced (0.45 ≤ αAI < 0.70 )

SW Business-Logic Coding Code Gen. 0.30 0.70 0.60 0.50 0.40 0.47 —SW API Design Arch. Design 0.30 0.70 0.55 0.40 0.45 0.48 —MF Sensor Data Analysis Pred. Maint. 0.45 0.75 0.40 0.50 0.20 0.59 —MF Precision Assembly Assembly 0.65 0.55 0.25 0.22 0.22 0.67 —SW API Documentation Documentation 0.70 0.40 0.15 0.15 0.10 0.69 —

AI-centric (αAI ≥ 0.70 )

MF Visual Inspection Quality Insp. 0.75 0.50 0.10 0.20 0.15 0.73 —MF AGV Route Mgmt. †

Logistics 0.82 0.45 0.12 0.15 0.18 0.74 AI-Only 

SW Boilerplate Generation Code Gen. 0.90 0.30 0.10 0.10 0.05 0.76 —MF Production Cycle Machine Op. 0.92 0.30 0.05 0.08 0.15 0.76 AI-Only 

> †

AGV: Automated Guided Vehicle. 

where w = ( wr, w τ , w c, w a, w h) is a non-negative weight vector summing to unity. Human affinity is αH(s) = 1 − αAI (s). The rationale for these weights, and the extent to which the affinity score changes under alternative weight choices, are discussed in Section 3.2. The five dimensions form a compact, auditable instrument: every allo-cation decision can be traced back to the dimension scores that drove it, supporting the transparency requirements of governance-oriented deploy-ments. 11 Table 2 shows representative subtasks from the 50-task benchmark (25 per domain), ordered by increasing AI affinity. Dimension scores are reported in 

[0 , 1] , with r=repetitiveness, τ =technical depth, c=creativity, a=ambiguity, and h=human interaction. Human-Only and AI-Only constraints denote hard policy rules enforced by the PolicyEngine independently of the learned allocator. 

3.2. Affinity Weight Specification 

The default weight vector w = (0 .35 , 0.25 , 0.20 , 0.10 , 0.10) is grounded in the human–automation literature. Repetitiveness receives the largest weight ( wr = 0 .35 ) because rule-governed work is the canonical automation target (Parasuraman et al., 2000) and yields the largest AI productivity gains (Peng et al., 2023). Technical depth (wτ = 0 .25 ) is positive because contemporary AI performs strongly on well-structured technical tasks inside the technological frontier (Brynjolfsson et al., 2023; Dell’Acqua et al., 2023), though organisations in safety-critical domains should treat this as a starting point. Creativity (wc = 0 .20 , inverted), together with ambiguity and 

human interaction (wa = wh = 0 .10 , both inverted), is weighted this way to reflect jagged-frontier evidence that open-ended and interpersonal tasks still tend to favour human performance (Dell’Acqua et al., 2023; Noy and Zhang, 2023; McNeese et al., 2018). 

Sensitivity check. Perturbing each weight by ±30% (re-normalised) preserved the rank-ordering of all strategies and the direction of all governance effects (Section 5.10). 

3.3. The Autonomy Spectrum: Five Collaboration Modes 

With each subtask characterised, the next design question is what an “allocation” actually means in practice. HAAS resolves this through a five-mode autonomy spectrum M (see Table 3), extending prior taxonomies of automation levels (Sheridan, 1992) and robot autonomy (Beer et al., 2014) to the specific demands of knowledge-work allocation. Each mode m ∈ M 

is characterised by a human participation share σH(m) ∈ [0 , 1] and an AI participation share σAI (m) = 1 − σH(m).12 Table 3: The five collaboration modes of the autonomy spectrum.                         

> Mode σHσAI Semantics
> Human-Only 1.0 0.0 Human executes alone; AI not involved.
> Copilot >0.5<0.5Human leads; AI assists in real time.
> Peer ≈0.5≈0.5Complementary parallel execution; neither leads.
> Supervised <0.5>0.5AI leads; human validates before applying.
> Autonomous 0.0 1.0 AI executes alone; human not involved.

Modes with σH > 0 and σAI > 0 are shared modes ( Copilot , Peer ,

Supervised ). The Peer mode is selected when the difference between human and AI shares falls within a balance threshold δpeer (default 0.20 ); otherwise the dominant partner determines whether the mode is Copilot (human primary) or Supervised (AI primary). In the Peer mode, shares are held at the equal-split nominal values ( σH = σAI = 0 .5) without the fatigue-driven dynamic adjustment applied in Equations (2) and (3); the balance threshold 

δpeer governs mode entry but not within-mode redistribution. The values in Table 3 are baseline shares that define the nominal character of each mode. In the three shared modes, these shares are further adjusted at execution time as functions of the current human fatigue f ∈ [0 , 1] and subtask complexity, producing dynamic shares σCopilot AI (s, f ) and σSupervised H (s, f ) (mode superscript, arguments in parentheses). The mode-selection label remains fixed by the policy; only the within-mode split adapts: 

σCopilot AI (s, f ) = clip(0 .60 pf + 0 .20 κ(s), σ min , σ max ) (2) 

σSupervised H (s, f ) = clip  0.35 j(s) − 0.50 max(0 , f − 0.65) , σ H

> min

, σ H

> max

 (3) where pf = max (0 , f − 0.35) is the excess fatigue above the hybrid trigger threshold, κ(s) = ( τ +a)/2 is a subtask complexity proxy, and j(s) = ( a+h)/2

is a judgment-need proxy. Here, clip (x, a, b ) truncates x to the admissible interval [a, b ]: values below a are set to a, and values above b are set to b.Bounds are (σmin , σ max ) = (0 .20 , 0.55) for Copilot AI share and (0 .10 , 0.40) for Supervised human share. The Copilot upper bound of 0.55 allows the within-mode AI share to transiently exceed 0.5 under high fatigue or complexity, which may appear inconsistent with the σH > 0.5 condition in Table 3. The resolution is that the mode label is fixed by the governance policy at mode-selection time , not by the real-valued participation share at execution time. 13 The σH > 0.5 entry in Table 3 therefore describes the nominal character of 

Copilot — the human leads the subtask and retains authority — not a strict runtime invariant of the share equation. In design terms, a human can remain the accountable lead even when the AI contributes the larger share of mechanical execution, which is the intended semantics of the Copilot mode. 

Example. For a mid-complexity subtask ( κ(s)=0.55 , j(s)=0.45 ) at fa-tigue f =0.50 (so pf =0.15 ), Equation (2) gives σCopilot AI = clip (0 .60 ×0.15 + 0.20 ×0.55 , 0.20 , 0.55) = clip (0 .20 , . . . ) = 0 .20 , leaving the human with an 80% share. At f =0.80 (pf =0.45 ), the same subtask yields σCopilot AI =clip (0 .38 , . . . ) = 0 .38 , illustrating how higher fatigue shifts more work toward the AI assistant. 

3.4. Policy-Aware Allocation Engine 

With the cognitive characterisation and the autonomy spectrum defined, the central question becomes: how does HAAS decide which mode to apply to a given subtask at a given moment? This decision must satisfy two competing requirements simultaneously: it must respect hard organisational constraints regardless of what the data suggest, and it must adapt to accumulated outcome evidence to improve allocation quality over time. The allocation engine operates in two sequential stages: governance pre-filtering and bandit-based learning (see Algorithm 1). 

Stage 1 — Governance pre-filtering (PolicyEngine). A PolicyEngine evalu-ates an ordered list of governance rules against the current subtask s, operating as a forward-chaining production rule system (Turban, 1992; Giarratano and Riley, 1994; Liao, 2005): rules fire in priority order (lower values take prece-dence), and the first matching rule wins, producing a deterministic governance directive. Each rule specifies the conditions under which it applies (task type, subtask name, human-state threshold) and what it enforces: a designated lead agent ( Human or AI ), a mandatory collaboration mode, or an autonomy cap that limits how far AI execution may proceed. The resulting directive therefore does one of two things: it either fixes the assignment outright, or it restricts the admissible portion of the autonomy spectrum within which learning may operate. If no rule matches, the engine applies the system-wide default cap, leaving the bandit free to choose anywhere within the permitted spectrum. This design ensures that organisational governance is structurally prior to learned behaviour, not a post-hoc filter. 14 Stage 2 — Contextual bandit learning. If no policy forces the assignment, a bandit allocator selects a collaboration mode from the feasible set permitted by the active governance constraints. The bandit therefore maintains one arm per collaboration mode ( Human-Only , Copilot , Peer , Supervised ,

Autonomous ) for each task type. The framework supports four algorithms. However, the empirical benchmark reported here focuses on UCB1, LinUCB, and Thompson Sampling, and leaves Discounted-UCB out because the 8-sprint horizon is too short for reward discounting to produce behaviour meaningfully different from UCB1: 

• UCB1 (Auer et al., 2002): optimistic upper confidence bound Qk +

Cpln N/n k where C is an exploration constant. 

• Discounted-UCB (D-UCB): UCB1 with exponential discount γt; im-plemented for longer or more clearly non-stationary deployments, but not analysed further here because with γ= 0.97 and only 8 sprints it behaves almost identically to UCB1. 

• LinUCB (Li et al., 2010): linear contextual bandit that uses d(s) as the context vector; reward is modelled as d(s)⊤θk + ϵ.

• Thompson Sampling (Russo et al., 2018): samples ˜Qk from a Beta posterior, selecting arg max k ˜Qk.During the first Texplore sprints (set to 3 for the 8-sprint benchmark; see Section 4.3), a heuristic warm-start initialises the bandit over the feasible modes before online learning begins. The framework can also be seeded from a human managerial configuration specified through the setup workflow; in the benchmark reported here, however, all learned allocators use the same heuristic warm-start so that their online adaptation is compared from a common initial condition. 

Reward signal. After execution the bandit receives a scalar reward, whose exact form depends on the active reward profile. The main benchmark in this paper uses a four-outcome reward that combines quality, time, cost, and well-being: 

R = wq · q + wt · (1 − ¯t) + wco · (1 − ¯c) + ww · W (4) where q is subtask quality, ¯t is normalised time taken, ¯c is normalised cost, and W is a well-being composite that penalises fatigue, monotony, 15 deskilling, and exclusion while rewarding fatigue relief (formal definition of 

W given in Section 4.1). The main-table benchmark uses (wq, w t, w co , w w) = (0 .30 , 0.20 , 0.10 , 0.40) . Cumulative allocation regret — the non-negative re-ward gap relative to the better of the two pure counterfactual baselines — is defined formally in Section 4.4 and serves as the primary learning diagnostic. Additional supported reward profiles are efficiency , quality-first , and symbio-sis ; these are predefined presets within a more general configuration space in which users may set arbitrary weight combinations over quality, time, cost, and well-being to express narrower or mixed decision objectives. The learner therefore chooses directly among the feasible collaboration modes. Once a mode has been selected, the system derives the corresponding lead agent and the human/AI participation shares at execution time. This keeps the learning problem simple while preserving the richer collaboration structure captured by the framework. Algorithm 1 makes the decision logic explicit. The sequence is simple: governance is checked first, then learning operates only within the set of modes that governance permits. If a policy rule forces a mode, that decision is applied directly. Otherwise, the policy layer defines the feasible set through the active autonomy cap, and the bandit selects within that set. The chosen mode is finally translated into the allocation specification (m, σ H, σ AI ).

Algorithm 1 HAAS Allocation Decision 

Require: subtask s, human state (f, trust , skill ), policy rules P, bandit B

Ensure: allocation specification (m, σ H, σ AI ) 

> 1:

dgov ← PolicyEngine (P, s ) ▷ governance directive  

> 2:

if dgov prescribes a direct assignment then  

> 3:

return assignment implied by dgov  

> 4:

else  

> 5:

Mfeas ← modes admissible under dgov  

> 6:

m ← BanditSelect (B, s, f, Mfeas ) 

> 7:

return InstantiateMode (m, s, f)  

> 8:

end if 

Representative rules help illustrate how this works in practice. Regulatory-compliance subtasks may force Human-Only ; onboarding periods may force 

Copilot ; and critical fatigue ( f > 0.90 ) may force Autonomous . When no rule forces a specific mode, the policy layer still constrains the choice through the active autonomy cap. For example, if the cap is Supervised , the bandit 16 may select any mode except Autonomous . In the IF-THEN notation of classical production-rule systems (Giarratano and Riley, 1994), representative rules are: 

R1: IF task.type = regulatory-review THEN force Human-Only 

R2: IF sprint ≤ 2 ∧ task.type = 

architecture 

THEN force Copilot ,cap = Supervised 

R3: IF fatigue > 0.90 THEN force Autonomous 

[safety exception: operator incapacitation; not a general governance preference] 

R4: IF (no match) THEN cap = system-wide default 

Rules fire in priority order; the first match wins and short-circuits the re-maining rules, matching the standard conflict-resolution strategy of forward-chaining expert systems. Table 5 lists the complete benchmark rule catalogue, showing how the three structurally distinct rule types (hard assignment, mode-forcing, and autonomy-cap) are distributed across the two domains and the governance levels at which they activate. Governance levels L1–L4 define cumulative layers of constraint severity, as summarised in Table 4. 

Table 4: Governance Ladder benchmark levels.                            

> Level Label Risk threshold Autonomy budget threshold Added constraints
> L0 None ——Policy layer disabled; allocator uncon-strained. L1 Light 0.72 0.45 No task-specific rules; only a permissive autonomy cap. L2 Moderate 0.62 0.58 No task-specific rules; a stricter autonomy cap. This is the calibrated baseline used in the strategy comparison tables. L3 Strong 0.52 0.68 Adds supervised execution on selected high-impact subtask types in both domains, on top of the autonomy cap. L4 Very strong 0.40 0.78 Adds human-only execution on the most critical subtask types and supervised execu-tion on additional subtask types, producing a compliance-first regime.

Detailed rule sets by domain are reported in Table 5. Rules fire in priority order (lower = higher precedence); the first match short-circuits remaining rules. In L1–L4, the experience-based autonomy cap remains active in addition to any task-specific rules. 

17 The full policy engine for a given level is assembled by composing the rules active at that level with the experience-based autonomy cap (Table 4), so the effective constraint at any given subtask is the strictest applicable rule plus the cap, evaluated in priority order. 

Table 5: Benchmark PolicyEngine rule catalogue. “Hard” rules force a pure allocation outcome regardless of the bandit. “Mode” rules force a collaboration mode while leaving within-mode participation shares to the framework. The autonomy cap ( ⋆) is a parametric mechanism active at all L1–L4 levels; its thresholds vary by level (see Table 4).                                                                    

> Rule id Domain Type Condition (task types) Effect Prio Min level
> Universal (both domains)
> exp_autonomy_cap ⋆SW + MF Cap risk ≥τror budget < τ bcap =Supervised dynamic L1
> Software domain
> sw_high_judgment_sup SW Mode Architecture Design, Code Review, Debugging
> →Supervised 40 L3
> sw_requirements_human SW Hard Requirements Analysis force Human 15 L4
> sw_architecture_human SW Hard Architecture Design force Human 20 L4
> sw_testing_sup SW Mode Testing, Refactoring →Supervised 50 L4
> Manufacturing domain
> mfg_high_impact_sup MF Mode Quality Inspection, Pred. Maintenance, Process Pro-gramming, Process Optimi-sation
> →Supervised 40 L3
> mfg_safety_human MF Hard Safety Supervision force Human 12 L4
> mfg_assembly_sup MF Mode Assembly →Supervised 45 L4

Prio = rule priority (lower fires first); “dynamic” indicates that the rule is evaluated at runtime against per-subtask risk and budget signals rather than assigned a fixed rank. Hard rules override both the bandit and the autonomy cap by forcing a pure human-only or AI-only allocation. Mode rules constrain the bandit’s action set by forcing a specific collaboration mode, but leave participation shares to the framework equations (Equations (2) and (3)). ⋆Cap thresholds (τr , τ b) vary by level; see Table 4. 

This two-stage structure provides four desirable properties: ( i) governance-first — the policy acts as a hard veto, so no bandit optimisation can violate an organisational constraint; ( ii ) learning within bounds — the policy-defined autonomy cap turns the autonomy spectrum into an explicit limit that the organisation controls; ( iii ) continuous participation shares — the clipped equations produce real-valued σ that adapt to fatigue and complexity; and (iv ) human state as an active signal — fatigue f influences the allocation decision at three points: it helps determine which mode is selected, it affects how work is split between the human and the AI within that mode, and it contributes to the reward received after execution. As a result, the system 18 can progressively move more load away from the human as fatigue increases. 

3.5. From Allocation to Simulated Outcomes 

Figure 2 summarises the closed execution loop that connects governed allocation to the benchmark outcomes. Each cycle begins with a subtask s

and the current human state (f, trust , skill ). The allocation engine returns an allocation specification (m, σ H, σ AI ); pure modes map to single-agent execution, while shared modes distribute work according to the participation shares in Section 3.3. Execution then produces both operational outcomes (quality, time, and cost) and human-impact consequences. The latter include the signals used to compute composite well-being measures: fatigue burden, monotony, deskilling, exclusion from cognitively valuable work, and any fatigue-relief benefit from offloading. Together, these outcomes populate the benchmark KPIs (Section 4.4) and the scalar reward (Equation (4)) that updates the learner. After each subtask, fatigue either accumulates or recovers, trust adjusts to AI reliability, and skill decays when human participation remains too low (Section 3.6). The benchmark therefore evaluates a full adaptive closed loop, not a static assignment rule. Simulated outcomes are generated by a parameterised stochastic model 

rather than a live agent. For each subtask, quality is drawn from a Gaussian whose mean is a weighted linear combination of five task-dimension scores (repetitiveness, technical depth, creativity, ambiguity, and human-interaction demand), with low noise ( σ = 0 .04 ) for the AI agent and higher noise (σ = 0 .07 ) for the human agent to reflect individual variability. Time taken is a deterministic fraction of the subtask baseline duration scaled by task complexity, and cost follows directly from time and the agent’s hourly rate. In shared modes the final quality combines both agents’ contributions with a synergy bonus proportional to their participation shares and the subtask’s technical depth, while time benefits from a partial-overlap factor. This design makes the benchmark fully reproducible across seeds without requiring live API calls. 

3.6. Human State Model 

A key distinguishing feature of HAAS relative to purely technical alloca-tion frameworks is its explicit representation of the human agent’s evolving state. Allocation decisions that appear optimal at the beginning of a shift may become harmful as fatigue accumulates, trust erodes, or sustained disuse begins to degrade skill. To model these dynamics, HAAS maintains three 19 1. Inputs subtask, state, policy   

> 2. Governed mode selection
> →(m, σ H, σ AI )
> 3. Work execution mode semantics + shares
> 4. Outcomes and reward quality, time, cost, well-being
> 5. State update fatigue, trust, skill
> Figure 2: Five-step execution loop connecting governed allocation to the benchmark outcomes reported in Section 5.

state variables for each human agent that are updated after every subtask execution and feed back into subsequent allocation cycles. 

Fatigue. Fatigue f ∈ [0 , 1] accumulates at a base rate βf = 0 .07 per hour, scaled by task complexity and a context-switching penalty ( ∆fswitch = 0 .015 

per agent switch, capped at 0.08 per cycle). Recovery follows f ← f − βr · trest 

(βr = 0 .12 ), with a chronic residual component ( λ = 0 .18 ) that prevents full within-session recovery. Parameters are heuristic defaults calibrated for qualitative consistency with the cognitive fatigue literature (Warm et al., 2008; Yerkes and Dodson, 1908; Endsley, 1995). 

Trust. Trust trust ∈ [0 , 1] decays on errors (rate 0.08 ) and grows on successes (rate 0.02 ), with a floor of 0.35 and damping of 0.60 . The asymmetric rates reflect findings that trust repairs more slowly than it degrades (Lee and See, 2004; Buçinca et al., 2021). Trust modulates the human’s willingness to accept AI-led modes; low trust increases the effective cost of Supervised 

and Autonomous assignments. 

Deskilling. If the AI-execution fraction exceeds ρdesk = 0 .80 for three or more consecutive sprints, a deskilling rate of 0.003 per cycle is applied, operationalising the automation-complacency phenomena documented by Parasuraman and Manzey (2010) and Bainbridge (1983). A tutor-mode intervention reactivates human tasks to prevent further loss. Across all three state models, the parameter values are intended to cap-ture plausible dynamics grounded in prior literature rather than to provide validated measurements of human behaviour (see Section 6.3); key defaults are listed in Table G.24. To evaluate HAAS empirically, we instantiate the closed loop described above (Figure 2) in a reproducible simulation benchmark. The following 20 section details the simulation platform, the two application domains, the allocation strategies compared, the outcome metrics, and the statistical protocol used to assess robustness. 

4. Experimental Setup 

The following subsections describe the platform on which all experiments were run (Section 4.1), the two application domains and their scenarios (Section 4.2), the allocation strategies included in the comparison (Section 4.3), the outcome metrics (Section 4.4), and the statistical protocol used to assess result robustness (Section 4.5). 

4.1. Simulation Platform 

All experiments were conducted on the Human–AI Symbiosis Studio ,a Python intelligent allocation system built with Streamlit (interactive dash-board), Pandas/NumPy/SciPy (analytics), Plotly (visualisation), Pydantic v2 (immutable data models), and SQLite (persistent storage). The platform is available for evaluation purposes (see Software Availability Statement). The Streamlit dashboard exposes five views: setup wizard, KPI sum-mary, allocation history, benchmark comparison, and a decision-support panel rendering human state alongside governance-filtered recommendations. Fig-ure 3 shows the KPI summary view for a manufacturing simulation run, illustrating the sprint-level KPI table, collaboration-mode distribution, and allocation-history charts. Experiments are reproducible via fixed seeds and a command-line A/B runner; the repository tuning workflow used to cali-brate benchmark defaults is summarised in Table F.23. Each benchmark run evaluates the framework in a single-human/single-AI configuration, chosen to isolate allocation logic and governance effects without altering the five collaboration modes defined by the framework. Extending the benchmark to multi-actor coordination is left for future work. Unless stated otherwise, the main benchmark uses a single four-outcome 

reward profile that balances quality, time, cost, and well-being with weights 0.30, 0.20, 0.10, and 0.40, respectively. The well-being component is itself a weighted composite of five sub-signals: WB (t) = 1 − ωf F (t) − ωmM (t) − ωdD(t) − ωeE(t) + ωrR(t), (5) where the sub-weights are ωf = 0 .35 , ωm = 0 .20 , ωd = 0 .25 , ωe = 0 .10 ,

ωr = 0 .10 . The five sub-signals are defined as follows. F (t) ∈ [0 , 1] is the 21 Figure 3: Screenshot of the Human–AI Symbiosis Studio dashboard (KPI summary view, manufacturing domain). The panel shows sprint-level KPIs, collaboration-mode distribution, and allocation history charts generated during a benchmark run. 

current normalised fatigue level (updated per the dynamics in Section 3.6). 

M (t) ∈ [0 , 1] is the monotony signal, defined as the fraction of the last five subtasks assigned to the same agent without mode variation. D(t) ∈ [0 , 1] is the cumulative deskilling increment, activated when the AI-execution fraction exceeds ρdesk = 0 .80 for three or more consecutive sprints (Section 3.6). 

E(t) ∈ [0 , 1] is the cognitive exclusion signal, proportional to the fraction of high-value subtasks (high technical depth or creativity) assigned exclusively 22 to AI in the current sprint. R(t) ∈ [0 , 1] is the shared-mode relief bonus, equal to the fraction of subtasks executed in a shared mode ( Copilot ,

Peer , or Supervised ) that reduced the human’s predicted fatigue increment relative to a pure-human assignment. The oracle baseline is reported only as a hindsight upper bound on the scalar reward objective in Equation (4), not on every KPI column individually: it selects, for each subtask, the mode that would have maximised that reward if the true outcome had already been known. Alternative reward priorities are reported separately in Section 5.10. Note that this oracle is mode-optimal : it ranges over all five collaboration modes and is therefore a strictly different reference from the cumulative regret floor, which is defined in Section 4.4 relative to the two pure counterfactual baselines (pure-human and pure-AI) only. A mode-optimising oracle can itself accumulate positive regret under the two-baseline definition, as the results tables confirm. 

4.2. Domains and Scenarios 

To assess whether HAAS generalises across structurally different work contexts, we instantiate the framework in two domains (software engineering and manufacturing) that differ in task granularity, cost structure, and safety constraints. Each domain contains four scenarios (Table 6), but the main benchmark tables focus on the standard scenario per domain ( Standard Sprint 

for software; Standard Production for manufacturing), using a common horizon of 8 cycles and 4 subtasks per cycle to preserve cross-domain comparability. 

Table 6: Scenario catalog used by the HAAS benchmark battery.                   

> Domain Scenario Dominant pressure / emphasis
> Software Standard Sprint Balanced requirements, coding, review, and testing. Software High Complexity Architecture-heavy work where human expertise is more decisive. Software Maintenance Debugging, refactoring, review, and maintenance-oriented work. Software Deadline Crunch Higher task pressure with faster human-fatigue accumulation. Manufacturing Standard Production Balanced operation, inspection, and maintenance. Manufacturing Quality Crisis Defect analysis and process correction. Manufacturing Scheduled Stop Maintenance and cobot reintegration. Manufacturing New Product Ramp-Up Ramp pressure with operator fatigue buffering.

23 The software domain uses a cost profile of €50/h for human agents and 

€2/h for AI, reflecting current LLM API economics. The manufacturing domain uses €32/h and €8/h respectively, reflecting collaborative robot operating costs. Human profiles range from junior/operator to senior/engineer, varying initial skill and fatigue resistance. 

4.3. Allocation Strategies 

To make the performance of the three learned allocators easier to interpret, the benchmark also includes simpler comparison strategies. These range from basic heuristics to fixed human-only or AI-only assignments, as well as an oracle upper bound. The main benchmark reports the following strategy families: 1. Learned allocators : UCB1, LinUCB, and Thompson Sampling. UCB1 and LinUCB are reported with policies enabled and disabled; Thompson Sampling is reported with policies enabled. 2. Heuristic baselines : an affinity heuristic and a random allocator. 3. Managerial baseline : a human+scheduler condition seeded by a manager-defined initial configuration, instantiated here as first-cycle affinity preferences. 4. Fixed baselines : Fixed-human and AI-only. 5. Diagnostic comparator : an oracle counterfactual baseline used as a reference point rather than as a feasible deployment policy. All bandit strategies begin with the same heuristic policy for the first 

Texplore = 3 sprints. This short warm-up phase gives each strategy an initial set of observations before the learned bandit policy takes over. The framework also supports a human-defined initial configuration via the setup wizard, but that option is evaluated separately in the benchmark as the managerial baseline rather than used to seed the learned allocators. 

4.4. Outcome Metrics 

We distinguish three families of outcome metrics. First, we report opera-tional KPIs (key performance indicators): the main performance measures used to judge how well each domain is operating. Because the two domains model different kinds of work, these KPIs are domain-specific. Second, we report cross-domain human-impact indicators , which track how allocation choices affect fatigue, trust, skill retention, and human participation across both settings. Third, we report cumulative allocation regret , which serves as a learning diagnostic for the adaptive strategies. 24 Operational KPIs. In the software domain, the primary KPIs are lead time (hours/sprint), defect escape rate (%), rework percentage (%), cost per feature (€), hybrid subtask percentage, and fatigue avoided via copilot assistance. In the manufacturing domain, the corresponding KPIs are Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE) proxy (0–1), scrap rate (%), safety incident rate, cost per batch ( €), stockout events per shift, machine overload hours, hybrid subtask percentage, and fatigue avoided via cobot assistance. 

Cross-domain human-impact indicators. To make the human consequences of allocation visible across both domains, we also report end-of-sprint fatigue level ( f ), cumulative deskilling increments P δd, trust level, and human participation percentage. 

Cumulative allocation regret. As a learning diagnostic, the benchmark also reports cumulative allocation regret. For each subtask, regret is the non-negative gap between the realized reward and the better of the two pure counterfactual baselines (pure-human and pure-AI execution under the same conditions). This floor at zero ensures that when a shared collaboration mode outperforms both pure alternatives, the contribution to regret is zero rather than negative. The oracle strategy reported in the results tables (Tables 11 and 12) is a separate, mode-optimal hindsight comparator that selects among all five collaboration modes; it is not the same reference as the two-baseline regret floor defined here, and it is therefore possible for the oracle to accumulate positive regret under this definition. 

Governance screens. To characterise how the policy layer changes the set of operationally viable configurations , the benchmark applies three nested diagnostic screens: 

• Acceptable : five basic safeguards must hold simultaneously: mean quality remains above the minimum threshold, mean fatigue remains below the fatigue ceiling, estimated deskilling risk stays below its maximum bound, overall human participation remains above the minimum floor, and no governance violations occur. 

• Reasonable : all Acceptable conditions hold, and two additional work-design conditions are satisfied: human work does not become excessively monotonous, and the allocation mix preserves a meaningful level of shared Human–AI collaboration while limiting fully autonomous execu-tion on high-value tasks. 25 • Responsible : all Reasonable conditions hold, and capability-retention constraints are also satisfied: humans retain a minimum share of partic-ipation in high-value work, and risky tasks continue to involve shared Human–AI execution. The screen definitions above specify the diagnostic conditions used in the benchmark. Key algorithmic and human-state defaults are enumerated in the simulation parameter reference (Table G.24). The purpose of these screens is diagnostic rather than prescriptive. They do not constitute deployment recommendations or normative labels for organ-isational practice. Instead, they indicate whether a governance configuration keeps an increasingly broad set of operational, human-impact, and capability-retention objectives within bounds at the same time. The contract-sensitivity analysis in Section Appendix D then shows how the set of screen-passing strategies changes when the reward profile is varied, making explicit that the set of viable operating points depends on the governance contract and decision objective being imposed. 

4.5. Statistical Protocol 

The benchmark is designed primarily for comparative evaluation of al-location patterns rather than for exhaustive hypothesis testing across all strategies. Each strategy–scenario combination is run with 30 independent seeds and the main tables report cross-seed means to make operating-point differences easy to inspect. To avoid a large multiple-comparison exercise on synthetic benchmark outputs, only one pairwise comparison is tested inferentially: LinUCB with policies disabled versus AI-only. This comparison was specified in advance because AI-only defines the efficiency frontier in the audited standard scenarios, whereas LinUCB + off is the strongest human-participatory configuration by descriptive regret ranking. The comparison is evaluated with a two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test using the 30 paired seed outcomes, with α = 0 .05 . Effect size is reported as 

r = Z/ √N , where Z is the Wilcoxon normal-approximation statistic and N is the number of pairs. All remaining comparisons are interpreted descriptively through cross-seed means, seed-level consistency, and the sensitivity analyses reported later in the paper; seed-level dispersion for the pre-specified AI-only versus LinUCB + off contrast is reported in Table E.22. 26 The inferential result should be read as supportive evidence about simula-tion stability under the specified benchmark settings, not as field-confirmatory evidence about organisational deployment performance. 

5. Results 

This section opens with the paper’s main systems result: governance severity can be benchmarked as a tunable design variable rather than treated as a binary policies-on versus policies-off switch. The section is organised in two blocks. It first develops the governance result in three steps: the Governance Ladder benchmark in the audited standard scenarios, a cross-scenario portability check of the preferred governance level, and a long-horizon stability check. It then situates that result within the broader benchmark by reporting strategy comparisons in the standard scenario, portability across scenarios, shifts in collaboration modes, human-state effects, component ablations, and contract sensitivity. 

5.1. Governance Ladder: How Much Governance Is Needed? 

Context. The binary policies-on versus policies-off comparison is informa-tive, but it does not show how much governance is needed before the system moves from useful authority control to over-restriction. To make that trade-off explicit, we ran a five-level Governance Ladder benchmark with a fixed learner (LinUCB ) and progressively stricter PolicyEngine configurations. L0 re-moves the policy layer entirely; L1 enables only a permissive autonomy cap; L2 corresponds to the calibrated baseline governance setting; L3 adds broader supervision rules for high-impact tasks; and L4 applies a compliance-first configuration in which supervised or human-owned execution becomes the dominant ceiling. The two numeric thresholds are benchmark parameters on a 0–1 scale. The risk threshold is compared against the task-risk score computed from subtask complexity and criticality; if the score exceeds that threshold, AI autonomy is restricted. The autonomy-budget threshold is compared against the autonomy budget ( 0.45 experience +0 .25 process maturity +0 .30 (1 −risk )); if the budget falls below that threshold, autonomy is also restricted. Lower risk thresholds and higher budget thresholds therefore make the autonomy cap easier to trigger and thus make governance more restrictive. For this benchmark, Objective denotes the domain-specific target KPI used to rank governance levels under the active contract: cost per feature 27 in software and cost per batch in manufacturing. Both are minimization objectives, so lower values are better. 

Findings. Main result. Increasing governance intensity monotonically redistributes work away from Autonomous execution and toward Super-vised execution, but the best governance level depends on the domain rather than being universal. In software, the best 8-cycle operating point remains L0, whereas in manufacturing the best standard-scenario operating point appears at L3. 

Evidence. Tables 7 and 8 report the audited standard scenarios across 30 seeds. In software, Autonomous execution falls from 55.5% at L0 to 22.7% at L2 and to 0.0% at L3–L4, while Supervised execution rises from 16.6% at L0 to 54.4% at L2 and 87.7% at L3. The key authority shift therefore occurs between L1 and L2. Operationally, however, L0 remains best on the benchmark objective (161.48), and the largest additional penalty appears at the top of the ladder: objective value worsens from 199.05 at L3 to 243.77 at L4, while fatigue rises from 0.757 to 0.956. Manufacturing shows a different pattern. Autonomous execution falls from 40.1% at L0 to 14.7% at L2 and 3.1% at L3–L4, while Supervised 

execution rises from 18.2% at L0 to 52.9% at L2 and 83.2% at L3. Unlike software, the move to stronger governance is not purely a cost: objective value improves from 147.13 at L0 to 139.07 at L3, and fatigue falls from 0.926 to 0.842. L4 further increases rule-forced decisions but does not improve the objective over L3.                                                                

> Table 7: Governance Ladder results in the audited standard scenarios (30 seeds, 8 cycles,
> LinUCB ). Objective denotes the domain-specific target KPI: cost per feature in software and cost per batch in manufacturing; lower values are better.
> Domain Level Objective Lead time Quality Fatigue Cum. regret
> Software L0 161.48 23.13 0.502 0.734 10.68 Software L1 162.47 23.20 0.503 0.737 10.69 Software L2 184.86 24.00 0.458 0.743 12.96 Software L3 199.05 24.33 0.438 0.757 14.19 Software L4 243.77 26.93 0.414 0.956 17.49 Manufacturing L0 147.13 24.76 0.463 0.926 10.94 Manufacturing L1 144.62 24.51 0.465 0.909 10.64 Manufacturing L2 151.31 24.96 0.452 0.889 10.98 Manufacturing L3 139.07 23.58 0.460 0.842 9.56 Manufacturing L4 144.65 24.16 0.460 0.886 9.82

28 Table 8: Governance intervention intensity and mode redistribution across the ladder (30 seeds, 8 cycles, LinUCB ). 

Domain Level Policy caps Policy forced Sup. share Auto. share Human part. 

Software L0 0.00% 0.00% 16.56% 55.50% 22.96% Software L1 0.59% 0.00% 17.12% 55.04% 23.01% Software L2 38.87% 0.00% 54.44% 22.73% 29.11% Software L3 50.00% 34.42% 87.66% 0.00% 34.17% Software L4 28.57% 65.58% 70.13% 0.00% 40.57% Manufacturing L0 0.00% 0.00% 18.24% 40.13% 33.50% Manufacturing L1 4.50% 7.63% 21.91% 38.70% 32.58% Manufacturing L2 42.08% 7.63% 52.90% 14.73% 36.10% Manufacturing L3 17.56% 70.23% 83.21% 3.05% 34.03% Manufacturing L4 7.63% 86.26% 80.92% 3.05% 35.21% L0                        

> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> Quality
> better
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> Software
> 0.50 0.50
> 0.46 0.44
> 0.41
> Software
> L0
> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> Fatigue
> better
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 0.73 0.74 0.74 0.76
> 0.96
> Software
> L0
> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> Lead Time (h)
> better
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25 23.13 23.20 24.00 24.33
> 26.93
> Software
> L0
> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> Cumulative Regret
> better
> 0.0
> 2.5
> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> 17.5
> 10.68 10.69
> 12.96
> 14.19
> 17.49
> Software
> L0
> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> Quality
> better
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> Manufacturing
> 0.46 0.46 0.45 0.46 0.46
> L0
> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> Fatigue
> better
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 0.93 0.91 0.89
> 0.84
> 0.89
> L0
> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> Lead Time (h)
> better
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25 24.76 24.51 24.96
> 23.58 24.16
> L0
> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> Cumulative Regret
> better
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 10.94 10.64 10.98
> 9.56 9.82

Governance Ladder Key Performance and Well-Being Metrics 

Figure 4: Governance Ladder — quality, fatigue, lead time, and cumulative regret per level and domain (30 seeds, 8 cycles, LinUCB ). Thicker bar border marks the domain optimum. Manufacturing optimal: L3. Software optimal: L0. 

Interpretation. The practical value of governance lies in the middle region of the ladder. In software, L2 is the last level that materially redis-tributes authority without collapsing the benchmark into a compliance-first regime. In manufacturing, L3 is the clearest “useful control” point: it achieves the strongest authority retention together with the best objective value in the audited standard scenario (Figure 4). The mode redistribution (Figure 5) shows that this improvement is structural: governance systematically redirects autonomous AI assignments into supervised collaborations rather than simply 29 L0                            

> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Share of assignments (%)
> 7% 7% 10%
> 9% 9% 8%
> 12% 12% 8% 15%
> 17% 17%
> 54%
> 88%
> 70%
> 55% 55%
> 23%
> AU SU
> redirection
> Software
> L0
> None
> L1
> Light
> L2
> Mod.
> L3
> Strong
> L4
> V.Strong
> Share of assignments (%)
> 15% 14% 12% 8% 9%
> 14% 12% 8%
> 13% 14%
> 13%
> 18% 22%
> 53% 83% 81%
> 40% 39%
> 15%
> AU SU
> redirection
> Manufacturing
> Governance Ladder Collaboration Mode Redistribution
> Mode
> Human-Only Copilot Peer Supervised Autonomous

Figure 5: Collaboration mode redistribution across governance levels. Autonomous 

execution (red) collapses monotonically as governance tightens; Supervised (purple) absorbs the difference. Human-Only does not grow, confirming that governance converts AI autonomy into supervised collaboration, not human replacement. 

restoring human-only execution. Taken together, these results sharpen the binary policies-on comparison: the useful level of governance is not fixed but depends on the domain, and the ladder provides a systematic way to locate it before deployment. 

5.2. Scenario-Dependent Governance Level 

Context. The standard scenarios identify whether a graded governance regime is useful in the two audited cases, but they do not show whether the same governance level transfers across contexts. To test that point, we repeated the ladder over all eight repository scenarios using 10 seeds per scenario. 

Findings. Main result. The best governance level is scenario-dependent. No single ladder level dominates the full scenario battery. 

Evidence. Table 9 summarises the winner by scenario. L0 is best in four scenarios: software Standard Sprint , Maintenance , and Deadline Crunch , plus manufacturing New Product Ramp-Up . L3 is best in the other four: software 

High Complexity , and manufacturing Quality Crisis , Standard Production , and 

Scheduled Stop . The resulting split is exactly 4:4 between the no-governance and strong-governance ends of the ladder. Because this portability sweep uses a separate 10-seed design, the objective values in Table 9 are not expected to match exactly the 30-seed audited standard-scenario means reported earlier in Table 7; here the inferential target is the winning governance level within 30 each scenario. 

Table 9: Best Governance Ladder level by scenario (10 seeds, 8 cycles, LinUCB ). Objective values are from the portability sweep and therefore are not directly comparable to the 30-seed audited means in Table 7. 

Domain Scenario Best level Objective Supervised share Autonomous share 

Software Standard Sprint L0 162.27 16.82% 55.19% Software High Complexity L3 176.72 50.33% 32.87% Software Maintenance L0 133.92 14.10% 58.12% Software Deadline Crunch L0 177.47 17.98% 55.39% Manufacturing Standard Production L3 139.06 83.21% 3.05% Manufacturing Quality Crisis L3 144.63 81.56% 5.16% Manufacturing Scheduled Stop L3 100.46 64.38% 21.04% Manufacturing New Product Ramp-Up L0 145.35 17.83% 47.65% 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7                        

> Best objective quality
> High Complexity
> Standard Sprint
> Maintenance
> Deadline Crunch
> Strong Q=0.515 F=0.719
> None Q=0.502 F=0.738
> None Q=0.513 F=0.653
> None Q=0.440 F=0.853
> Software
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
> Best objective quality
> Quality Crisis
> Standard Production
> Scheduled Stop
> New Product Ramp-Up
> Strong Q=0.499 F=0.945
> Strong Q=0.458 F=0.842
> Strong Q=0.526 F=0.426
> None Q=0.429 F=0.998
> Manufacturing
> Gov. level
> L0 None
> L1 Light
> L2 Moderate
> L3 Strong
> L4 V.Strong

Portability: Best Governance Level per Scenario 

Figure 6: Best governance level per scenario (portability battery, 10 seeds, 8 cycles). Bar length encodes the objective value at the winning level; colour encodes the level (L0 blue, L3 red). L0 and L3 each win exactly four scenarios. 

Interpretation. Figure 6 sharpens the main claim of the paper: the 4:4 split between L0 and L3 winners makes clear that it is not enough to say that governance matters; one must also ask how much governance a given scenario can absorb before the control cost outweighs the authority benefit. The answer clearly depends on the scenario. 

5.3. Long-Horizon Governance Check 

Context. The main benchmark uses an 8-cycle horizon, which is sufficient to reveal directional effects but still relatively short for a learning-based allocator. To test whether the ladder shape changes when the learner has 31 more time to adapt, we repeated the standard scenarios at 16 cycles for L0, L2, and L4. 

Findings. Main result. Moderate governance becomes more competitive over longer horizons. At 16 cycles, L2 improves over L0 in both audited standard scenarios, whereas L4 remains over-restrictive. 

Evidence. Table 10 reports the long-horizon comparison. In software 

Standard Sprint , objective value falls from 159.45 at L0 to 157.08 at L2 while 

Supervised execution rises from 19.6% to 52.3%. In manufacturing Standard Production , objective value falls from 135.60 at L0 to 130.06 at L2, and fatigue declines from 0.857 to 0.733. L4 remains substantially more restrictive in both domains, with no corresponding gain over L2.                                            

> Table 10: Long-horizon check in the audited standard scenarios (30 seeds, 16 cycles,
> LinUCB ). Objective denotes the domain-specific target KPI: cost per feature in software and cost per batch in manufacturing; lower values are better.
> Domain Level Objective Lead time Quality Fatigue Supervised share
> Software L0 159.45 22.57 0.493 0.709 19.56% Software L2 157.08 22.18 0.473 0.610 52.26% Software L4 230.10 25.83 0.428 0.929 73.36% Manufacturing L0 135.60 23.79 0.472 0.857 21.09% Manufacturing L2 130.06 23.09 0.474 0.733 56.12% Manufacturing L4 139.23 23.77 0.472 0.831 83.33%

Interpretation. Figure 7 shows that the governance effects are persistent ,not transient. The manufacturing advantage of strong governance strengthens over time; the software penalty of over-governance compounds. Some of the short-run cost of moderate governance is offset when the learner has more cycles to acquire subtask-level preferences inside the governed action space. The ladder should therefore be read not only as a policy-severity analysis, but also as a horizon-sensitive benchmark of governed learning. 

5.4. Strategy Comparison — Software Domain 

Context. At the full-strategy benchmark level, the software domain has high task heterogeneity, the cost differential between human and AI agents is large ( €50/h versus €2/h), and no hard safety constraints force specific assignments, giving learned allocators the widest discretion. 

Findings. Main result. In the software benchmark, AI-only is the efficiency frontier, whereas LinUCB + off is the strongest strategy that still 32 Quality ( better)           

> 0.36
> 0.38
> 0.40
> 0.42
> 0.44
> 0.46
> 0.48
> 0.50
> 0.52
> Software
> 0.493
> 0.473
> 0.428
> Quality
> Fatigue ( better)
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> 0.709
> 0.610
> 0.929
> Fatigue
> Cumulative Regret ( better)
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 21.642 22.043
> 32.353
> Cumulative Regret
> Responsible Score ( better)
> 0.42
> 0.44
> 0.46
> 0.48
> 0.50
> 0.52
> 0.54
> 0.473
> 0.508
> 0.519
> Responsible Score
> Quality ( better)
> 0.42
> 0.44
> 0.46
> 0.48
> 0.50
> 0.52
> Manufacturing
> 0.472 0.474 0.472
> Fatigue ( better)
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> 0.857
> 0.733
> 0.831
> Cumulative Regret ( better)
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> 17.5
> 20.0
> 22.5
> 25.0
> 27.5
> 30.0
> 19.942
> 18.372 18.579
> Responsible Score ( better)
> 0.425
> 0.450
> 0.475
> 0.500
> 0.525
> 0.550
> 0.575
> 0.600
> 0.458
> 0.517
> 0.532
> Long-Horizon (16 cycles) Governance Stability Across Scenarios
> L0 None L2 Moderate L4 Very Strong

Figure 7: Long-horizon stability (16 cycles, 30 seeds) for L0, L2, and L4 on four outcome dimensions. Thick markers: standard scenario; faint lines: other scenarios in the same domain (context variation). Manufacturing: L2 improves over L0 on all axes; L4 remains over-restrictive despite high supervision share. Software: L4 compounds regret and fatigue; L2 achieves the most balanced profile. 

preserves meaningful human participation. (Throughout this section, AI-only 

denotes the fixed-baseline strategy that assigns every subtask to the AI agent alone, whereas Autonomous denotes the collaboration mode within the five-mode spectrum where σAI = 1 .0. An AI-only baseline operates exclusively in Autonomous mode, but the Autonomous mode can also be selected individually by governed allocators for specific subtask types.) 

Evidence. Table 11 reports mean KPI values across 30 seeds for the Standard Sprint scenario (8 cycles per run, post-calibration setting). AI-only achieves the shortest lead time (16.63 h/cycle), the lowest fatigue (0.124), and the lowest regret (4.10). Under the active reward contract, HAAS 

therefore does not surpass fixed AI-only execution on aggregate throughput. Among the human-participatory strategies, LinUCB + off is the most favourable operating point by descriptive regret ranking. It stays close to the AI-only quality level (0.502 vs. 0.505) while improving substantially on time, fatigue, and regret relative to the other learned and heuristic alternatives (pre-specified Wilcoxon: W =0, p< 0.001 , r= 0.87 , indicating that AI-only achieved lower regret in every one of the 30 matched seed pairs). LinUCB + on is slightly slower (24.00 h) and lower in quality (0.458), but it remains the 33 strongest governance-enabled configuration. 

Interpretation. Two additional observations help interpret the table. First, the oracle counterfactual (quality 0.528, fatigue 0.232) is a mode-optimal 

hindsight comparator: it selects the best of all five collaboration modes per subtask with perfect foresight, and thereby shows that the simulator contains higher quality states than most online strategies currently reach. Importantly, the oracle is not the reference used to compute cumulative regret: regret is measured against the better of pure-human and pure-AI only (see Section 4.4). In other words, the oracle is mode-optimal, not regret-minimal relative to the AI-only baseline. A mode-optimising oracle can therefore itself accrue positive regret under that two-baseline definition (oracle regret = 4.71 vs. AI-only regret = 4.10 in this table), which explains why AI-only, a fixed pure strategy, can outrank the oracle on the regret column. Second, with only 8 sprints and a 3-sprint warm-up, bandits have limited time to learn; the competitive performance of the affinity heuristic is therefore consistent with a short-horizon benchmark (Section 6.4). Tables 11 and 12 report cross-seed means, sorted by cumulative regret; best values per column are shown in 

bold and worst values in italic .34 Table 11: Strategy comparison in the software Standard Sprint scenario. 

Strategy Lead time (h/sprint) Quality Cost (€) Fatigue Cum. regret 

AI-only baseline 16.63 0.505 154.57 0.124 4.10 

Oracle counterfactual baseline 18.36 0.528 273.54 0.232 4.71 LinUCB + off 23.13 0.502 645.91 0.734 10.69 LinUCB + on 24.00 0.458 739.44 0.743 12.96 UCB1 + off 24.50 0.496 746.46 0.870 12.76 Affinity heuristic baseline 26.29 0.501 855.10 0.959 13.30 Thompson + on 26.10 0.444 895.45 0.927 16.10 UCB1 + on 25.48 0.436 864.87 0.919 16.56 Human+scheduler baseline 25.73 0.449 759.19 0.822 16.57 Random baseline 29.57 0.356 1135.27 0.998 27.54 Fixed-human baseline 42.12 0.166 2106.23 1.000 51.92 

n = 30 seeds (primes 11–151); values are cross-seed means. Wilcoxon signed-rank test (LinUCB + off vs AI-only, pre-specified): W = 0 , p < 0.001 , r = 0 .87 (large effect; AI-only achieved lower regret in all 30 matched seed pairs). The Oracle counterfactual is a mode-optimal hindsight baseline (best of all five modes per subtask under perfect foresight); it achieves higher quality than AI-only (0.528 vs. 0.505) but accumulates higher regret (4.71 vs. 4.10). The latter occurs because regret is measured relative to the pure-AI floor: the oracle’s occasional non-AI assignments incur positive regret under that reference even when they improve quality. The oracle is therefore not a global performance ceiling on the regret column, and it is not the reference for cumulative regret (see Section 4.4). 

5.5. Strategy Comparison — Manufacturing Domain 

Context. The manufacturing domain differs structurally from software: it introduces hard policy rules (human-only safety escalation, AI-only machine operations), a narrower cost differential ( €32/h vs. €8/h), and safety/OEE considerations in the reward, all of which constrain the learner’s degrees of freedom. 

Findings. Main result. The directional pattern is the same as software — AI-only at the efficiency frontier — but governance effects are smaller and the affinity heuristic is a more credible competitor. 

Evidence. Table 12 reports results for the Standard Production sce-nario. AI-only gives the lowest lead time, fatigue, and regret (17.38 h, 0.358, 3.48; Wilcoxon W =0, p< 0.001 , r= 0.87 for LinUCB + off vs. AI-only, again unanimous across all 30 seed pairs). The W =0 result matches the software domain exactly, reflecting that AI-only achieved a strictly lower regret in every individual seed run in both domains; given the large cost differential 35 between agents, the AI-only efficiency advantage is deterministic across seeds rather than stochastic. LinUCB + off is the strongest learned strategy by descriptive regret ranking (24.76 h, 0.463 quality, 10.94 regret). Crucially, the affinity heuristic performs differently here than in software: it achieves competitive quality (0.493) and regret (10.22) but at the cost of near-saturated fatigue (0.989). This reflects the manufacturing subtask catalogue’s higher density of physically demanding, human-affinity tasks (assembly, precision inspection, floor supervision) that the heuristic assigns to the human agent regardless of fatigue state — a pattern LinUCB avoids by adapting to the human-state feedback signal.                                                                    

> Table 12: Strategy comparison in the manufacturing Standard Production scenario.
> Strategy Lead time (h/sprint) Quality Cost (€)Fatigue Cum. regret
> AI-only baseline 17.38 0.496 259.54 0.358 3.48
> Oracle counterfactual baseline 20.37 0.528 387.38 0.563 4.54 Affinity heuristic baseline 26.90 0.493 659.74 0.989 10.22 LinUCB + off 24.76 0.463 588.54 0.926 10.94 LinUCB + on 24.96 0.452 605.24 0.889 10.98 UCB1 + on 25.71 0.445 639.37 0.934 11.90 Thompson + on 26.97 0.441 689.12 0.988 13.02 UCB1 + off 26.68 0.449 671.86 0.985 13.05 Human+scheduler baseline 28.85 0.408 733.76 0.998 16.39 Random baseline 29.13 0.372 771.86 0.999 19.82 Fixed-human baseline 40.23 0.230 1264.62 1.000 36.03
> n= 30 seeds (primes 11–151); values are cross-seed means. Wilcoxon signed-rank test (LinUCB + off vs AI-only, pre-specified): W= 0 ,p < 0.001 ,r= 0 .87 (large effect).

Interpretation. The practical interpretation of the on/off policy com-parison in Table 12 is that governance does not improve throughput in this benchmark slice. Policies-on is slightly slower and lower in quality than Lin-UCB + off. In manufacturing, the binary policies-on result should therefore be read as an explicit operating constraint rather than as a free performance gain; the graded Governance Ladder analysis (Section 5.1) then shows that stronger governance levels can still become beneficial under a different calibration of rule intensity. 

5.6. Cross-Scenario Portability 

Context. The audited standard-scenario tables above establish the 36 baseline ranking per domain. To check whether those rankings generalise, we swept all eight scenarios with four focal conditions (AI-only, LinUCB + on/off, affinity heuristic), 10 seeds per scenario. 

Findings. Main result. The AI-only efficiency frontier is stable; the best human-participatory strategy is not. 

Evidence. AI-only is the best objective-value strategy in all eight scenar-ios shown in Table 13. Among human-participatory conditions, LinUCB + on leads in six scenarios, LinUCB + off in software Standard Sprint, and the affinity heuristic in software Maintenance. The full per-scenario table is reported in Section Appendix A.                            

> Table 13: Main-text summary of cross-scenario portability (10 seeds, 8 cycles per scenario). Objective values are lower-is-better mean scores for the best human-participatory strategy in each scenario.
> Domain Scenario Best human-participatory Objective
> Software Standard Sprint LinUCB + off 195.77 Software High Complexity LinUCB + on 215.15 Software Maintenance Affinity 143.64 Software Deadline Crunch LinUCB + on 216.62 Manufacturing Standard Production LinUCB + on 150.88 Manufacturing Quality Crisis LinUCB + on 170.51 Manufacturing Scheduled Stop LinUCB + on 123.76 Manufacturing New Product Ramp-Up LinUCB + on 164.07

Interpretation. The benchmark consistently shows an AI-only efficiency frontier, but does not support a universal claim that one governed strategy dominates across all scenarios. 

5.7. Governance Redistributes Collaboration Modes 

Context. The KPI tables report governance outcomes but not its mecha-nism .

Findings. Main result. Governance changes how work is allocated more than how much performance is obtained. 

Evidence. Table 14 summarises the mode redistribution under LinUCB; In software, enabling policies raises Supervised execution from 16.9% to 54.5% while cutting Autonomous from 55.2% to 22.1%; the corresponding performance cost is a 3.8% increase in lead time and an 8.8% reduction in quality, with negligible fatigue change. Manufacturing shows the same pattern at a smaller magnitude ( Supervised : 19.9% → 52.7%; lead time 37 +0.8%; quality −2.4%). The full appendix table additionally reports cost and regret (Section Appendix B).                                    

> Table 14: Main-text summary of governance-induced mode redistribution under LinUCB
> (30 seeds, 8 cycles, audited standard scenarios).
> Domain Policies Lead time (h/sprint) Quality Fatigue Human-Only Supervised Autonomous
> Software Off 23.13 0.502 0.734 5.3% 16.9% 55.2% Software On 24.00 0.458 0.743 5.2% 54.5% 22.1% Manufacturing Off 24.76 0.463 0.926 8.4% 19.9% 40.1% Manufacturing On 24.96 0.452 0.889 8.6% 52.7% 14.7%

Interpretation. The mode redistribution data make the governance mechanism visible: policy enforcement is primarily an authority reallocation, converting Autonomous slots into Supervised ones rather than shifting work back to human-only execution. 

5.8. Human State and Well-Being 

Context. The KPI tables report efficiency metrics but do not directly surface the implications for human agents: how fatigued are they, and do AI-heavy strategies erode skill over time? 

Findings. Main result. AI-only minimises fatigue in the short run, but it also pushes the system toward deskilling because human practice falls below the minimum threshold. Fixed-Human does the opposite: it avoids deskilling but saturates fatigue at f = 1 .000 in both domains. The learned strategies sit between these extremes. 

Evidence. Table 15 summarises the human-state reading of the focal strategies in the two audited standard scenarios. AI-only achieves the lowest fatigue in both domains (0.124 in software; 0.358 in manufacturing), but it removes human practice by construction. Fixed-human does the opposite: it preserves full human exposure but saturates fatigue at 1.000 in both domains. LinUCB occupies the middle ground: fatigue remains substantially above AI-only but below the most human-heavy baselines, while mixed human involvement is preserved. This is exactly the design space that HAAS is intended to reveal: which configurations preserve human capability at an operational cost the organisation may still accept. 38 Table 15: Main-text summary of human-state trade-offs in the audited standard scenarios. Values synthesize the focal strategies from Tables 11 and 12.                  

> Strategy Software fatigue Manufacturing fatigue Human involvement Human-state reading
> AI-only baseline 0.124 0.358 None Lowest short-run fatigue, but no hu-man practice exposure. LinUCB + off 0.734 0.926 Mixed Preserves non-zero human involve-ment at a clear fatigue cost. LinUCB + on 0.743 0.889 Mixed, gov-erned Similar middle-ground pattern, with governance retaining mixed human participation. Affinity heuris-tic baseline 0.959 0.989 Mixed Human-state burden is near satura-tion despite competitive quality in some settings. Fixed-human baseline 1.000 1.000 Full Maximum practice exposure, but op-erationally unsustainable fatigue.

Interpretation. The human-state results make the benchmark’s core trade-off explicit: short-run fatigue reduction and long-run capability preser-vation do not point to the same operating point. 

5.9. Component Ablation 

Context. To separate the contribution of the main architectural layers more explicitly, we ran a compact LinUCB-centred ablation on the two audited standard scenarios, using 10 seeds and the same 8-cycle horizon (Table 16). The comparison removes the policy layer, trust dynamics, deskilling feedback, or fatigue dynamics one at a time while keeping the rest of the configuration fixed. 

Findings. Main result. The reported trade-off is driven mainly by the policy layer and fatigue dynamics; deskilling behaves as a longer-horizon signal in the present benchmark. 

Evidence. The ablation yields three clear conclusions. First, remov-ing the policy layer improves regret in both domains (software: 11.01 →

6.94; manufacturing: 11.32 → 9.07), confirming that the PolicyEngine is a substantive source of the reported trade-off rather than a cosmetic wrapper. Second, removing fatigue dynamics sharply improves regret and collapses fatigue, indicating that human-state coupling materially shapes the bench-mark behaviour. Third, removing deskilling feedback has negligible effect over 8 cycles, which suggests that deskilling is represented architecturally but 39 remains a long-horizon signal in the present benchmark rather than a short-run driver of the headline results. Trust dynamics have a smaller but still non-zero effect, mainly through time/fatigue regularisation. The full ablation table, including lead time and cost, is reported in Section Appendix C.                                             

> Table 16: Main-text summary of the component ablation ( LinUCB + on , 10 seeds, 8 cycles). Lower regret and fatigue are better.
> Domain Configuration Quality Fatigue Cum. regret
> Software Full model 0.456 0.833 11.01 Software No policy layer 0.493 0.925 6.94 Software No fatigue dynamics 0.512 0.059 7.96 Software No trust dynamics 0.465 0.752 10.63 Software No deskilling 0.456 0.833 11.01 Manufacturing Full model 0.451 0.886 11.32 Manufacturing No policy layer 0.453 0.999 9.07 Manufacturing No fatigue dynamics 0.516 0.072 9.85 Manufacturing No trust dynamics 0.455 0.841 11.20 Manufacturing No deskilling 0.451 0.886 11.32

Interpretation. The ablation supports the claim that the benchmarked behaviour comes from the interaction between governance and human-state modelling, not from a generic bandit wrapper alone. Put differently, the policy layer is not intended to minimise regret in isolation; it exists to trade some short-run efficiency for governance compliance and a larger set of diagnostically viable operating points. That role becomes visible in the screen-pass analysis (Table D.21), where the governance-enabled configuration passes the responsible screen more often than the unconstrained variant across all tested manufacturing reward profiles. 

5.10. Benchmark-Internal Contract Sensitivity in Manufacturing 

Context. The strategy ranking above is computed under a single four-outcome reward profile. How does the set of screen-passing configurations change when a different reward priority is applied? 

Findings. Main result. The set of screen-passing configurations is reward-profile-dependent. Governance ( LinUCB + on ) consistently passes the responsible screen more often than the unconstrained variant across all three profiles tested, whereas the acceptable screen is profile-dependent. 40 Evidence. Table 17 summarises the manufacturing sweep across four-outcome , cost+time , and quality+cost+time profiles. Under the four-outcome profile, LinUCB + on passes the acceptable screen in 53% of seeds and the 

responsible screen in 53% of seeds; LinUCB + off passes acceptable in 13% and responsible in 0%. The cost+time profile narrows viable configurations further and is the one case where LinUCB + off passes the acceptable screen more often than the governance-enabled variant; quality+cost+time shifts the screen-passing balance back toward LinUCB + on . The full benchmark-metric table is reported in Section Appendix D.                              

> Table 17: Main-text summary of contract sensitivity in manufacturing (30 seeds, 8 cycles).
> Acceptable and Responsible denote the acceptable and responsible screen pass rates.
> Profile Strategy Objective Accept-able Respons-ible
> Four-outcome LinUCB + off 147.1 0.13 0.00 Four-outcome LinUCB + on 151.3 0.53 0.53 Cost + time LinUCB + off 133.8 1.00 0.00 Cost + time LinUCB + on 152.6 0.33 0.33 Quality + cost + time LinUCB + off 147.8 0.03 0.00 Quality + cost + time LinUCB + on 151.5 0.50 0.50

Interpretation. The result demonstrates a key property of the HAAS 

benchmarking engine: it can expose how the PolicyEngine reshapes the set of jointly acceptable operating points under any given reward contract, making the interaction between governance configuration and reward priority an analysable system-level quantity rather than an implicit design assumption. 

6. Discussion 

This section interprets what the benchmark shows for governed Human–AI work design, considers how far the cognitive instrument may transfer across domains, and clarifies both the main limits of the present study and the next steps needed to extend it. 

6.1. Implications for Work Design 

The benchmark suggests a practical reading of Human–AI work design. In many real settings, the question is not whether to maximise automation at all 41 costs, but how much authority can be delegated without violating oversight, safety, or capability-retention requirements. From that perspective, the results support a graduated autonomy approach rather than a single dominant policy. AI-only defines the efficiency frontier, but governance changes the decision problem by making some degree of human participation non-negotiable. The resulting cost of governance is best read as the price of retaining authority and oversight: more supervised work, slightly slower execution, and in some cases lower quality. That is the practical role of HAAS : an ex-ante design and benchmarking artefact rather than an autonomous controller. Organisations can encode local policy limits, run the benchmark under alternative reward contracts, and read the resulting collaboration-mode redistribution as the operational signature of each governance configuration before committing to one in practice. The five-dimension cognitive instrument also shows promising cross-domain stability: applied without modification to both software engineering and manufacturing tasks, it produced sensible affinity rankings in both do-mains. The current evidence is stronger for transferability of the schema 

than for any specific calibrated weight vector; domain customisation remains localised to weight calibration (Equation (1)) and subtask catalogue construc-tion. 

6.2. Governance as a Tunable Design Variable 

The Governance Ladder results refine the paper’s central argument in two important ways. First, they quantify what the binary comparison only implies: each step up the ladder produces a predictable authority transfer away from Autonomous execution and toward Supervised or human-owned execution, with the magnitude and performance consequence of that transfer determined by domain structure. This confirms that the policy layer is not merely symbolic; it exerts a direct and measurable effect on collaboration patterns. Second, the results show that the effect of governance is not monotonic in performance terms. Greater control does not automatically produce better outcomes, nor does it uniformly degrade them. In the software benchmark, stronger governance mainly acts as operational friction, with the best 8-cycle result remaining at L0 and the upper end of the ladder becoming clearly over-restrictive. In manufacturing, by contrast, stronger governance can improve both the main objective and fatigue, with L3 emerging as the best standard-scenario operating point — a workload-buffering effect in which supervised 42 collaboration redistributes physical and cognitive load away from the human operator, reducing fatigue while maintaining or improving cost efficiency. The practical implication is that useful governance must be calibrated to the structure and risk profile of the work rather than applied as a uniform template. The portability results further strengthen this reading. Because L0 and L3 each win four scenarios, the experiment does not support a single universally optimal governance setting. What it supports instead is a contextual view: different scenarios absorb different amounts of authority control before the cost of intervention outweighs the benefit. This shifts the design question from “should governance be enabled?” to “how much governance can this operating context productively sustain?” The long-horizon check adds a further qualification. At 16 cycles, moderate governance (L2) improves over L0 in both audited standard scenarios, while very strong governance (L4) remains over-restrictive. This suggests that part of the short-run cost of governance reflects learning friction rather than permanent inefficiency. Given enough interaction cycles, the learner can adapt within the governed action space and recover part of that initial penalty. Governance should therefore be evaluated not only in terms of immediate throughput loss, but also in terms of how it shapes long-run learning under operational constraints. Figure 8 summarises the multi-dimensional trade-off in a single view, plotting quality, 1−fatigue , 1−regret (normalised), and responsible-strategy rate for all five levels (L0–L4) on each domain. In manufacturing, the L3/L4 profiles expand uniformly relative to L0 across all four axes; L1 and L2 occupy intermediate positions, confirming the cumulative structure of the ladder. In software, L0 leads on quality and regret but has no responsible-strategy coverage; L1 adds modest governance with minimal quality cost, while L2 achieves the most balanced polygon and remains the pragmatic operating recommendation. 43 Quality     

> 1Fatigue
> 1Regret
> (norm)
> Resp.
> Rate
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Software
> L0 None
> L1 Light
> L2 Moderate
> L3 Strong
> L4 V.Strong
> Quality
> 1Fatigue
> 1Regret
> (norm)
> Resp.
> Rate
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Manufacturing
> L0 None
> L1 Light
> L2 Moderate
> L3 Strong
> L4 V.Strong
> Governance Trade-Off Radar (standard scenario per domain)

Figure 8: Multi-dimensional trade-off radar for L0–L4 (standard scenario per domain, 30 seeds). Colours: L0 blue, L1 green, L2 red, L3 violet, L4 gold. Axes: quality, 1−fatigue ,

1−regret (normalised), responsible-strategy rate. Larger polygon = better overall profile. Manufacturing: L3–L4 uniformly dominate. Software: L2 provides the most balanced profile. 

Taken together, these findings support a bounded claim. The contribution of the Governance Ladder is not the discovery of a single best governance level. Rather, it is the demonstration that governance severity can be parameterised, benchmarked, and analysed as a controllable dimension of system behaviour— precisely the kind of evidence needed to study responsible human-AI allocation as an engineering problem rather than as a binary policies-on versus policies-off comparison. 

6.3. Limitations 

The main limitations are straightforward. ( i) HAAS is a simulation frame-work; human-state parameters ( βf , βr, λ, trust and deskilling coefficients) are literature-anchored heuristic defaults, not empirical estimates. Results should be read as comparative evidence about governance trade-offs under explicit assumptions, not as deployment forecasts for a specific organisation. ( ii ) The benchmark uses a single human-AI dyad over an 8-cycle horizon chosen to reflect a realistic operational window (two quarters of weekly sprints, or a standard manufacturing campaign); multi-actor coordination and deskilling dynamics (which the ablation confirms are negligible over 8 cycles) remain outside the current scope. To assess whether this horizon is sufficient for ban-dit learning to dominate the heuristic warm-start, we ran an identical sweep 44 at 16 cycles (30 seeds, both domains). Strategy rankings were unchanged in 7 of 8 scenarios, and the lead-time gap between LinUCB + on and the AI-only baseline narrowed by 1–2 hours per cycle across all scenarios (e.g., from +11 .8 h to +9 .3 h in Deadline Crunch ), confirming that the bandit is acquiring subtask-level preferences beyond the initialisation prior rather than simply replaying the warm-start heuristic. The 8-cycle results reported in the paper are therefore conservative: longer horizons favour the learning strate-gies. ( iii ) Outcome parameters and cost rates are domain-instantiated rather than externally calibrated. The default benchmark uses a parameterised AI agent for full reproducibility; however, the framework ships production-ready backends for Groq (Llama-3.1-8b-instant), Google Gemini (gemini-2.5-flash), Anthropic Claude, and local Ollama models. Preliminary experiments with Groq and Gemini across the software and manufacturing scenarios confirmed that the key comparative findings—strategy rankings, governance effects on fatigue reduction, and allocation–quality trade-offs—replicate under real LLM execution; absolute quality levels showed modest downward shifts ( ∆q ≈ 0.05 –

0.06 ) consistent with model-specific response variation rather than structural disagreement. Real deployments may still exhibit additional latency, quota constraints, or safety failure modes not fully captured by the parameterised baseline. ( iv ) Both the policy catalogue (sparse by design) and the cognitive instrument (derived deductively) lack field validation; expert elicitation or confirmatory factor analysis would be needed before deployment in novel domains. Taken together, these limits define the paper’s scope as a simulation-based system and benchmark study : it supports comparative reasoning under explicit assumptions, not direct deployment prediction. 

6.4. Future Work 

The next steps follow directly from those limits. Priority extensions include: (i) field validation with human participants or structured expert elicitation to calibrate both the cognitive instrument and the human-state coefficients; (ii ) systematic live-model benchmarks building on the Groq and Gemini integrations already validated in the platform, extending the preliminary single-seed alignment results to multi-seed, multi-domain runs and quantifying latency, cost, and quality deviations relative to the parameterised baseline across the full strategy catalogue; ( iii ) dynamic learning of affinity weights and richer reward contracts from outcome data, reducing manual calibration; (iv ) extension to multi-human, multi-AI team settings where assignment interdependencies create coordination effects; and ( v ) richer policy libraries, 45 longer horizons, and broader learner families, including discounted and non-stationary bandits, where adaptation has more opportunity to dominate heuristics; ( vi ) adaptive governance as a meta-policy layer that adjusts rule intensity dynamically in response to operational context, accumulated fatigue, or detected scenario type; and ( vii ) a structured domain-adaptation pathway covering expert elicitation of subtask scores, empirical calibration of human-state coefficients from task-logging and NASA-TLX data, and formalisation of site-specific governance constraints to enable deployment beyond simulation. 

7. Conclusion 

This paper presented HAAS , an implemented intelligent allocation frame-work for governance-constrained Human–AI work. HAAS combines a five-dimension cognitive instrument, a five-mode collaboration spectrum, and a policy-aware allocation engine in which a rule-based PolicyEngine con-strains learning-based mode selection. The HAAS benchmark platform turns that architecture into a configurable artefact for benchmarking alternative allocation policies before deployment. The benchmark results support a bounded conclusion. In the audited scenarios, AI-only defines the efficiency frontier, but the Governance Ladder shows that the useful level of authority control depends on domain and horizon rather than following a universal optimum. Stronger governance helps in some settings (most clearly manufacturing) and imposes avoidable friction in others. The contribution of HAAS is therefore not to argue for a single best allocation regime, but to provide a reproducible way to inspect how governance, learning, and human-state dynamics interact before deployment. That makes the framework useful as an engineering workbench for comparing feasible Human–AI operating points under explicit organisational constraints. 

Software availability 

The Human–AI Symbiosis Studio benchmark platform is accessible for interactive evaluation via a public web deployment (URL provided in the camera-ready version). The benchmark datasets and aggregated simulation results underlying the reported figures and tables will be deposited in a public repository with a permanent DOI upon acceptance. 46 Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation process 

During the preparation of this work, the authors used generative AI tools, including OpenAI Codex and Claude Code, to support software develop-ment tasks related to the application and simulation environment underlying the proposed framework, as well as manuscript-organisation and language-refinement tasks during submission preparation. All AI-assisted outputs were reviewed, verified, and edited by the authors. The authors take full responsibility for the content of the manuscript, the implemented system, and the reported results. 

References 

Ali, A., Azevedo-Sa, H., Tilbury, D.M., Robert, L.P., 2022. Heterogeneous human–robot task allocation based on artificial trust. Scientific Reports 12, 15304. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-19140-5 .Amershi, S., Weld, D., Vorvoreanu, M., Fourney, A., Nushi, B., Collisson, P., Suh, J., Iqbal, S., Bennett, P.N., Inkpen, K., Teevan, J., Kiber, R., Horvitz, E., 2019. Guidelines for human-AI interaction, in: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM. pp. 1–13. doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300233 .Auer, P., Cesa-Bianchi, N., Fischer, P., 2002. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. Machine Learning 47, 235–256. doi: 10.1023/A: 1013689704352 .Bainbridge, L., 1983. Ironies of automation. Automatica 19, 775–779. doi: 10. 1016/0005-1098(83)90046-8 .Bansal, G., Wu, T., Zhou, J., Fok, R., Nushi, B., Kamar, E., Ribeiro, M.T., Weld, D., 2021. Does the whole exceed its parts? the effect of AI explanations on complementary team performance, in: Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM. pp. 1–11. doi: 10.1145/3411764.3445717 .Beer, J.M., Fisk, A.D., Rogers, W.A., 2014. Toward a framework for levels of robot autonomy in human-robot interaction. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction 3, 74–99. doi: 10.5898/JHRI.3.2.Beer .47 Brynjolfsson, E., Li, D., Raymond, L., 2023. Generative AI at work. Working Paper 31161. National Bureau of Economic Research. URL: https://www. nber.org/papers/w31161 , doi: 10.3386/w31161 .Buçinca, Z., Malaya, M.B., Gajos, K.Z., 2021. To trust or to think: Cognitive forcing functions can reduce overreliance on AI in AI-assisted decision-making. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, 188:1–188:21. doi: 10.1145/3449287 .Crandall, B., Klein, G., Hoffman, R.R., 2006. Working minds: a practitioner’s guide to cognitive task analysis. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Cummings, M.L., 2014. Man versus machine or man + machine? IEEE Intelligent Systems 29, 62–69. doi: 10.1109/MIS.2014.87 .Dell’Acqua, F., McFowland, E., Mollick, E.R., Lifshitz-Assaf, H., Kel-logg, K.C., Rajendran, S., Krayer, L., Candelon, F., Lakhani, K.R., 2023. Navigating the Jagged Technological Frontier: Field Experimen-tal Evidence of the Effects of AI on Knowledge Worker Productivity and Quality. Working Paper 24-013. Harvard Business School. URL: 

https://ssrn.com/abstract=4573321 , doi: 10.2139/ssrn.4573321 .Dellermann, D., Ebel, P., Söllner, M., Leimeister, J.M., 2019. Hybrid intelligence. Business & Information Systems Engineering 61, 637–643. doi: 10.1007/s12599-019-00595-2 .Endsley, M.R., 1995. Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic systems. Human Factors 37, 32–64. doi: 10.1518/001872095779049543 .Endsley, M.R., Kaber, D.B., 1999. Level of automation effects on performance, situation awareness and workload in a dynamic control task. Ergonomics 42, 462–492. doi: 10.1080/001401399185595 .European Parliament and Council of the European Union, 2024. Regu-lation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelli-gence Act). Regulation. Official Journal of the European Union. URL: 

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj . oJ L, 2024/1689, 12.7.2024. 48 Fitts, P.M., 1951. Human engineering for an effective air-navigation and traffic-control system. National Research Council, Washington, DC. Edited volume. Garivier, A., Moulines, E., 2011. On upper-confidence bound policies for switching bandit problems, in: Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT), Springer. pp. 174–188. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-24412-4_16 .Giarratano, J.C., Riley, G.D., 1994. Expert systems: principles and program-ming. 3rd ed., PWS Publishing, Boston, MA. Gijsbrechts, J., Boute, R.N., Van Mieghem, J.A., Zhang, D.J., 2022. Can deep reinforcement learning improve inventory management? performance on lost sales, dual-sourcing, and multi-echelon problems. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 24, 1349–1368. doi: 10.1287/msom.2021.1064 .Gil, M., Albert, M., Fons, J., Pelechano, V., 2019. Designing human-in-the-loop autonomous Cyber-Physical Systems. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 130, 21–39. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2019.04.006 .Gonzalez, C., Donahue, K., Goldstein, D.G., Heidari, H., Jalali, M.S., Schelble, B., Singh, A., Woolley, A.W., 2026. Toward a science of human–AI teaming for decision making: A complementarity framework. PNAS Nexus 5, pgag030. doi: 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgag030 .Hauptman, A.I., Flathmann, C., McNeese, N.J., 2024. Adapting to the human: A systematic review of a decade of human factors research on adaptive autonomy. Applied Ergonomics 120, 104336. doi: 10.1016/j.apergo.2024. 104336 .Hemmer, P., Schemmer, M., Vössing, M., Kühl, N., 2021. Human-AI com-plementarity in hybrid intelligence systems: a structured literature re-view. PACIS 2021 Proceedings, Paper 78. URL: https://aisel.aisnet. org/pacis2021/78 . 25th Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS 2021), Virtual Event / Dubai, UAE, July 12–14, 2021. Inagaki, T., 2003. Adaptive automation: Sharing and trading of control, in: Hollnagel, E. (Ed.), Handbook of Cognitive Task Design. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 147–169. 49 International Organization for Standardization, 2011. Robots and robotic devices – Safety requirements for industrial robots – Part 1: Robots. International Standard ISO 10218-1:2011. ISO. International Organization for Standardization, 2016. Robots and robotic devices – Collaborative robots. Technical Specification ISO/TS 15066:2016. ISO. Kaber, D.B., Endsley, M.R., 2004. The effects of level of automation and adaptive automation on human performance, situation awareness and workload in a dynamic control task. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science 5, 113–153. doi: 10.1080/1463922021000054335 .Kamar, E., 2016. Directions in hybrid intelligence: complementing AI systems with human intelligence, in: Proceedings of the 25th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), AAAI Press / International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, New York, NY, USA. pp. 4070– 4073. URL: https://www.ijcai.org/Proceedings/16/Papers/603.pdf .Kirgil-Budakli, R., Zeng, Y., Akgunduz, A., 2025. Dynamic workload reallo-cation for human–robot teams based on real-time stress analysis. Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing 39, e18. doi: 10.1017/S0890060425100073 .Lattimore, T., Szepesvári, C., 2020. Bandit Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. URL: https://tor-lattimore.com/downloads/book/ book.pdf .Lee, J.D., See, K.A., 2004. Trust in automation: designing for appropriate reliance. Human Factors 46, 50–80. doi: 10.1518/hfes.46.1.50_30392 .Li, L., Chu, W., Langford, J., Schapire, R.E., 2010. A contextual-bandit approach to personalized news article recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW), ACM. pp. 661–670. doi: 10.1145/1772690.1772758 .Liao, S.H., 2005. Expert system methodologies and applications—A decade review from 1995 to 2004. Expert Systems with Applications 28, 93–103. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2004.08.003 .50 McNeese, N.J., Demir, M., Cooke, N.J., Myers, C., 2018. Teaming with a synthetic teammate: Insights into human-autonomy teaming. Human Factors 60, 262–273. doi: 10.1177/0018720817743223 .Miller, T., 2019. Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artificial Intelligence 267, 1–38. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2018.07. 007 .Monarch, R., 2021. Human-in-the-Loop Machine Learning: Active Learning and Annotation for Human-Centered AI. Manning Publications, Shelter Island, NY. Noy, S., Zhang, W., 2023. Experimental evidence on the productivity effects of generative artificial intelligence. Science 381, 187–192. doi: 10.1126/ science.adh2586 .Parasuraman, R., Manzey, D.H., 2010. Complacency and bias in human use of automation: an attentional integration. Human Factors 52, 381–410. doi: 10.1177/0018720810376055 .Parasuraman, R., Sheridan, T.B., Wickens, C.D., 2000. A model for types and levels of human interaction with automation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics – Part A: Systems and Humans 30, 286–297. doi: 10.1109/3468.844354 .Peng, S., Kalliamvakou, E., Cihon, P., Demirer, M., 2023. The impact of AI on developer productivity: Evidence from GitHub Copilot. arXiv:2302.06590. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06590 , doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302. 06590 .Petzoldt, C., Niermann, D., Keiser, D., Freitag, M., 2025. Adaptive human-robot collaboration in industrial assembly: augmented reality-supported dynamic task allocation with intuitive process planning. Procedia CIRP 134, 585–590. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2025.02.173 .Raisch, S., Krakowski, S., 2021. Artificial intelligence and management: The automation–augmentation paradox. Academy of Management Review 46, 192–210. doi: 10.5465/amr.2018.0072 .51 Russo, D.J., Van Roy, B., Kazerouni, A., Osband, I., Wen, Z., 2018. A tutorial on thompson sampling. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning 11, 1–96. doi: 10.1561/2200000070 .Seeber, I., Bittner, E., Briggs, R.O., de Vreede, G.J., de Vreede, T., Elkins, A., Maier, R., Merz, A.B., Oeste-Reiß, S., Randrup, N., Schwabe, G., Söllner, M., 2020. Machines as teammates: a research agenda on AI in team collaboration. Information & Management 57, 103174. doi: 10.1016/ j.im.2019.103174 .Sheridan, T.B., 1992. Telerobotics, automation, and human supervisory control. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Shneiderman, B., 2022. Human-Centered AI. Oxford University Press, Oxford. doi: 10.1093/oso/9780192845290.001.0001 .Turban, E., 1992. Expert systems and applied artificial intelligence. Macmillan, New York. Urrea, C., 2025. Hybrid deep learning-reinforcement learning for adaptive human-robot task allocation in Industry 5.0. Systems 13, 631. doi: 10. 3390/systems13080631 .Vaccaro, M., Almaatouq, A., Malone, T., 2024. When combinations of humans and AI are useful: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nature Human Behaviour 8, 2293–2303. doi: 10.1038/s41562-024-02024-1 .Wang, J., Yan, Y., Hu, Y., Yang, X., 2025. A reinforcement learning from human feedback based method for task allocation of human robot collab-oration assembly considering human preference. Advanced Engineering Informatics 66, 103497. doi: 10.1016/j.aei.2025.103497 .Warm, J.S., Parasuraman, R., Matthews, G., 2008. Vigilance requires hard mental work and is stressful. Human Factors 50, 433–441. doi: 10.1518/ 001872008X312152 .Yerkes, R.M., Dodson, J.D., 1908. The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology 18, 459–482. doi: 10.1002/cne.920180503 .52 Appendix A. Cross-Scenario Portability — Full Strategy Table 

Table A.18 extends the portability summary in Section 5.6 to all four focal conditions for each of the eight benchmark scenarios (10 seeds, 8 cycles). AI-only is the efficiency winner in all eight scenarios. Among human-participatory conditions, LinUCB + on leads in six scenarios; LinUCB + off leads in software Standard Sprint ; and the affinity heuristic leads in software Mainte-nance — the only scenario where a non-learning strategy is competitive on the benchmark objective.                                                 

> Table A.18: Cross-scenario portability sweep (10 seeds, 8 cycles per scenario). Objective values (lower is better); bold = best human-participatory result per scenario.
> Domain Scenario AI-only LinUCB + off LinUCB + on Affinity
> Software Standard Sprint 38.63 195.77 197.63 213.77 Software High Complexity 44.02 250.39 215.15 242.19 Software Maintenance 32.32 150.34 152.21 143.64
> Software Deadline Crunch 38.71 254.97 216.62 229.56 Manufacturing Standard Production 64.88 169.79 150.88 164.92 Manufacturing Quality Crisis 83.09 189.87 170.51 187.54 Manufacturing Scheduled Stop 42.22 126.75 123.76 125.15 Manufacturing New Product Ramp-Up 66.35 172.18 164.07 171.82
> n= 10 seeds per scenario; values are cross-seed mean objective values.

Appendix B. Governance-Induced Mode Redistribution 

Table B.19 quantifies the collaboration-mode shift when governance is enabled in the two audited standard scenarios ( LinUCB , 30 seeds, 8 cy-cles). The dominant effect is conversion of Autonomous assignments into 

Supervised ones; Human-Only share does not grow, confirming that the 

PolicyEngine redirects AI autonomy into supervised collaboration rather than replacing AI with human labour.   

> Table B.19: Collaboration-mode redistribution under LinUCB with governance off vs. on (30 seeds, 8 cycles, audited standard scenarios).

53 Domain Policies Lead time (h/sprint) Quality Cost ( €) Fatigue Cum. regret Human-Only Supervised Auto-nomous 

Software Off 23.13 0.502 645.91 0.734 10.69 5.3% 16.9% 55.2% Software On 24.00 0.458 739.44 0.743 12.96 5.2% 54.5% 22.1% Manufacturing Off 24.76 0.463 588.54 0.926 10.94 8.4% 19.9% 40.1% Manufacturing On 24.96 0.452 605.24 0.889 10.98 8.6% 52.7% 14.7% Remaining share distributed across Copilot and Peer . Governance on = L2 (Moderate) profile. 

Appendix C. Component Ablation 

Table C.20 isolates the contribution of each architectural component by removing it while holding the rest fixed (10 seeds, standard scenario per domain, 8 cycles, governance on). 

Table C.20: Component ablation: LinUCB + on , standard scenario per domain (10 seeds, 8 cycles). Lower regret and fatigue are better. 

Domain Configuration Lead time (h/sprint) Quality Fatigue Cost ( €) Cum. regret 

Software Full model 24.67 0.456 0.833 790.5 11.01 Software No policy layer 25.07 0.493 0.925 783.1 6.94 Software No fatigue dynamics 24.74 0.512 0.059 825.0 7.96 Software No trust dynamics 22.46 0.465 0.752 679.4 10.63 Software No deskilling 24.67 0.456 0.833 790.4 11.01 Manufacturing Full model 24.94 0.451 0.886 603.5 11.32 Manufacturing No policy layer 27.00 0.453 0.999 679.2 9.07 Manufacturing No fatigue dynamics 24.74 0.516 0.072 617.5 9.85 Manufacturing No trust dynamics 22.96 0.455 0.841 541.1 11.20 Manufacturing No deskilling 24.94 0.451 0.886 603.5 11.32 “No policy layer” = LinUCB + off . Near-zero fatigue in “No fatigue dynamics” confirms that fatigue coupling is the primary driver of the reported well-being trade-off. 

Appendix D. Contract Sensitivity — Manufacturing Domain 

Table D.21 shows how the set of screen-passing configurations changes across three reward profiles in manufacturing (30 seeds, standard scenario, 8 cycles). The governance-enabled variant ( LinUCB + on ) consistently passes the responsible diagnostic screen more often than the unconstrained variant 54 across all three tested profiles. For the acceptable screen, the advantage depends on the reward contract: governance improves pass rates under the four-outcome and quality+cost+time profiles, whereas LinUCB + off 

performs better under cost+time. This demonstrates that the PolicyEngine 

can expand the jointly viable operating region, but that the effect depends on which diagnostic screen and reward contract are being applied. 

Table D.21: Manufacturing contract sensitivity: mean benchmark metrics and governance screen rates by reward profile (30 seeds, 8 cycles). Acceptable = fraction of seeds passing the acceptable screen; Responsible = fraction passing the responsible screen.                                                                                             

> Profile Strategy Objective Quality Fatigue Cost ( €)Lead time (h/sprint) Cum. regret Accept-able Respons-ible
> Four-outcome AI-only 64.9 0.496 0.358 259.5 17.4 3.5 0.00 0.00 LinUCB + off 147.1 0.463 0.926 588.5 24.8 10.9 0.13 0.00 LinUCB + on 151.3 0.452 0.889 605.2 25.0 11.0 0.53 0.53 Affinity 164.9 0.493 0.989 659.7 26.9 10.2 0.00 0.00 Cost + time AI-only 64.9 0.496 0.358 259.5 17.4 —0.00 0.00 LinUCB + off 133.8 0.464 0.850 535.1 23.5 —1.00 0.00 LinUCB + on 152.6 0.448 0.899 610.5 25.0 —0.33 0.33 Affinity 164.9 0.493 0.989 659.7 26.9 —0.00 0.00 Quality + cost +time AI-only 64.9 0.496 0.358 259.5 17.4 —0.00 0.00 LinUCB + off 147.8 0.462 0.930 591.3 24.8 —0.03 0.00 LinUCB + on 151.5 0.451 0.891 605.9 25.0 —0.50 0.50 Affinity 164.9 0.493 0.989 659.7 26.9 —0.00 0.00

Screens are system diagnostics: Acceptable requires quality, fatigue, deskilling, human-participation, and governance-compliance conditions to hold simultaneously. Responsible 

additionally requires low monotony, a meaningful share of shared modes, limits on fully autonomous high-value work, and minimum human retention in high-value and risky tasks. 

Appendix E. Seed-Level Dispersion 

Table E.22: Seed-level dispersion for the pre-specified AI-only vs. LinUCB + off compari-son (median [Q1, Q3] across 30 seeds). 

55 Domain Strategy Lead time (h/sprint) Quality Fatigue Cum. regret 

Software AI-only 16.63 [16.62, 16.63] 0.505 [0.503, 0.506] 0.124 [0.124, 0.124] 4.099 [4.097, 4.103] Software LinUCB + off 23.12 [23.10, 23.17] 0.501 [0.496, 0.508] 0.734 [0.730, 0.737] 10.671 [10.562, 10.781] Manufacturing AI-only 17.38 [17.38, 17.39] 0.497 [0.494, 0.499] 0.358 [0.358, 0.358] 3.482 [3.452, 3.506] Manufacturing LinUCB + off 24.72 [24.58, 24.94] 0.462 [0.457, 0.467] 0.927 [0.905, 0.941] 10.912 [10.700, 11.094] 

Appendix F. Simulator Calibration Workflow 

Table F.23: Calibration workflow implemented in the repository tuning runner. 

Element Configuration 

Candidate family Affinity weights, four-outcome reward weights, well-being thresholds, exploration setting, discount factor γ, and LinUCB confidence parameter α.Search space Affinity jitter 0.28; reward and well-being jitter 0.35; threshold jitter 0.20; γ ∈ [0 .90 , 0.97] ; α ∈ [0 .35 , 1.60] .Ranking rule Feasible-first: constraint satisfaction prioritised before objective improvement. Purpose Internal simulator calibration for coherent benchmark defaults, not field validation. 

56 Appendix G. Simulation Parameter Reference 

Table G.24: Key simulation parameters and default values. 

Parameter Description Default 

C (UCB1) Exploration constant 1.5 

γ (D-UCB) Discount factor 0.97 

α (LinUCB) Confidence width 0.8 

Texplore Heuristic warm-up sprints 3

δpeer Peer mode balance threshold 0.20 

fhybrid Hybrid trigger fatigue 0.35 

σmax Copilot AI share upper bound 0.55 

βf Base fatigue rate (h −1) 0.07 

βr Fatigue recovery rate 0.12 

λ Chronic fatigue fraction 0.18 

ρdesk Deskilling AI ratio threshold 0.80 

(wr , w τ , w c, w a, w h) Five-dimension affinity weights (0.35, 0.25, 0.20, 0.10, 0.10) 

(wq , w t, w co , w w) Main four-outcome reward weights (0.30, 0.20, 0.10, 0.40) 

57