Title: Enforcing Benign Trajectories: A Behavioral Firewall for Structured-Workflow AI Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.26274v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Apr 2026 00:24:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# Enforcing Benign Trajectories: A Behavioral Firewall for Structured-Workflow AI Agents 

# Hung Dang (ORCID: 0009-0008-7009-2509) 

Van Lang University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam . Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): hung.dk@vlu.edu.vn; 

Abstract 

Structured-workflow agents driven by large language models execute tool calls against sensitive external environments. Existing pre-execution firewalls secure these interactions by evaluating each call in isolation. While practical for known signatures, stateless inspection remains vulnerable to context-sequential injection attacks, wherein an adversary navigates through individually benign, syntacti-cally valid tool calls to achieve a malicious objective. To address this threat, we propose Praetor , a telemetry-driven behavioral anomaly detection fire-wall. Drawing on sequence-based intrusion detection, Praetor compiles verified benign tool-call telemetry into a parameterized deterministic finite automaton (pDFA). The model defines permitted tool sequences, sequential contexts, and parameter bounds. At runtime, a lightweight gateway enforces these boundaries via an O(1) state-transition structural lookup, shifting computationally expen-sive analysis entirely offline. Evaluated on the Agent Security Bench (ASB), 

Praetor achieves a 5.6% macro-averaged attack success rate (ASR) across five scenarios. Within three structured workflows, ASR drops to 2.2%, outperform-ing Aegis, a state-of-the-art stateless scanner, at 12.8%. Praetor achieves 0% ASR on multi-step and context-sequential attacks in structured settings. Fur-thermore, against 1,000 algorithmically spliced exfiltration payloads, only 1.4% matched valid structural paths, all of which failed end-to-end string parameter guards (0 successes out of 14 surviving paths, 95% CI [0%, 23.2%]). Prae-tor introduces just 2.2 ms of per-call latency (a 3.7 × speedup over Aegis )while maintaining a 2.0% benign task failure rate (BTFR) on benign work-loads. Modeling the behavioral trajectory effectively collapses the available attack surface, but unmaintained continuous parameter bounds remain vulnerable to synonym-substitution attacks (18% evasion rate). Thus, exact-match whitelisting of sensitive parameters ultimately bears the final defensive load against execution. 

Keywords: AI Agent Security, Behavioral Profiling, Deterministic Finite Automaton, Telemetry-driven Architecture 

1

> arXiv:2604.26274v1 [cs.CR] 29 Apr 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Large language model-driven agents have transitioned to production deployments, including sensitive domains such as clinical reasoning workflows [1], operating as autonomous principals that invoke APIs and interact with external services via pro-tocols like the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [2]. This autonomy expands the attack surface: a single crafted prompt can instruct an agent to exfiltrate sensitive records or escalate privileges [3, 4]. To address this, pre-execution firewalls intercept tool calls before they reach the execution layer [5–7]. These systems perform content-first risk scanning and schema validation. While existing firewalls intercept known signatures [5], they suffer from a fundamental limitation: they evaluate each call as an isolated event with-out sequential context. Such sequential blindness creates a systemic vulnerability to 

context-sequential injection attacks , wherein an adversary navigates through a series of individually benign, syntactically valid tool calls to achieve a malicious objective (e.g., exfiltrating data via a seemingly normal email workflow after reading a database). As demonstrated in our diagnostic gap analysis (Section 7.2), such attacks bypass state-of-the-art stateless firewalls like Aegis with up to a 75% success rate, for no single action violates the stateless policy. A stateless firewall examines calls in iso-lation; hence, it cannot distinguish a legitimate action from an out-of-profile exploit that employs valid parameters. To mitigate this threat, we propose Praetor , a telemetry-driven behavioral anomaly detection firewall for autonomous AI agents. Our approach draws on sequence-based intrusion detection [8]. During the profiling phase, Praetor ingests a corpus of verified benign tool-call traces and compiles them into a parameterized deterministic finite automaton (pDFA) that encodes the agent’s expected behavioral envelope. Each state captures a sequential context derived from the w-gram prefix of preceding tool names, and each transition encodes permitted parameter value bounds. At runtime, the gateway incurs negligible overhead by performing a constant-time state-transition lookup against this pre-compiled automaton. Any tool call lacking a valid outgoing transition is deterministically halted and recorded in a cryptographic audit log. Consequently, an exploit must produce a sequence indistinguishable from the agent’s established trajectory at every step. Three properties distinguish Praetor from existing defenses. First, the gateway is stateful: every decision depends on the session’s prior call history rather than on the current call alone. Second, the behavioral profile is per-deployment, compiled from the telemetry of the specific agent it protects and not shared across deployments. Third, the runtime path performs no inference, for all semantic analysis is completed during the offline profiling stage. These three properties permit deployment as a sidecar without modifying the agent’s reasoning loop. Our contributions are as follows: 

• We formalize the problem of context-aware tool-call interception, wherein we define a threat model and establish security goals for bounded-time enforcement (Section 2). 2• We design Praetor , a decoupled architecture that compiles benign telemetry into a pDFA and enforces strict behavioral boundaries at runtime in constant time (Section 4). 

• We evaluate Praetor on the Agent Security Bench (ASB). The system achieves a 5.6% macro-averaged ASR across five scenarios. Restricted to three structured scenarios, ASR falls to 2.2% (baseline Aegis : 12.8% ). The gateway maintains 

2.2 ms per-call overhead and a 2.0% benign task failure rate (BTFR) (Section 7). 

# 2 Background and Threat Model 

# 2.1 LLM Agent Architecture and Tool Calling 

A tool-augmented language model agent operates as a reasoning loop in which the model receives a system prompt defining its role and constraints, processes a stream of user inputs and environmental observations, and emits structured action outputs that are routed to external services [9]. Each action takes the form of a tool call: a structured invocation consisting of a tool name and a parameter object conforming to a declared schema. The agent framework dispatches the call to the appropriate service, receives the result as an observation, and feeds it back to the model for subsequent reasoning. This loop continues until the agent either produces a terminal response or exhausts its context budget. The Model Context Protocol (MCP) has emerged as a widely adopted stan-dard for this dispatch layer, defining a transport-agnostic protocol through which agents discover available tools and submit invocations [2]. Agents built on frameworks such as LangChain, CrewAI, and the Anthropic SDK interact with MCP-compatible servers that expose databases, file systems, web browsers, and domain-specific APIs as addressable tools. Since the agent’s output is the sole input to these dispatches, and the model is an untrusted component that may be manipulated via prompt injection, the tool-call boundary is the natural enforcement point for a pre-execution security layer. 

# 2.2 System Model 

We define our system as comprising three entities. 

• Agent A: a language model-driven process that generates sequences of tool calls based on a fixed system prompt Π and a stream of environmental observations. 

• Environment E: the collection of external services, databases, and APIs that A

is authorised to invoke. 

• Gateway G: the enforcement component interposed between A and E, responsible for allowing or halting each tool call before it reaches E.During operation, the agent’s behavior manifests as an execution trace. 

Definition 1 (Execution Trace) . An execution trace is a finite sequence 

τ = ⟨(t1, p1), (t2, p2), . . . , (tk, pk)⟩, where ti ∈ T is a tool name drawn from the agent’s declared tool vocabulary T , and pi is the parameter vector supplied to tool ti

3Table 1 Summary of notation used in this paper.                      

> Symbol Description
> CBenign trace corpus
> τExecution trace
> TTool vocabulary
> pParameter vector
> PParameter space
> wContext window width
> θPruning threshold
> εnum , ε str Numeric slack factor and string radius expansion
> MParameterized DFA (pDFA)
> S, δ, s 0States, transition function, and initial state
> ⊥Distinguished idle symbol ¯e, r Centroid and radius for string parameter guards
> Q, p pass , δ guard Oracle query budget, plausible pass probability, and Pr[malicious parameter lies outside r-ball]

at step i.

Definition 2 (Benign Trace Corpus) . The benign trace corpus C = {τ1, τ 2, . . . , τ N }

is a set of execution traces collected during verified normal operation of A, in which no adversarial inputs were present. 

The gateway G receives each incoming call ( ti, pi) in sequence and decides, before forwarding to E, whether the call is consistent with the agent’s established behav-ioral envelope. A key design constraint is that G must reach this decision in bounded time and without querying any external service, for external queries would introduce unbounded latency into the agent’s execution path. 

# 2.3 Threat Model and Adversarial Capabilities 

We adopt the indirect prompt injection threat model, wherein the adversary X does not have direct access to the agent’s system prompt or model weights but can write content to data sources that the agent consumes as observations [3, 4]. Representative injection channels include: crafted entries in a customer support database that the agent reads, malicious content in a web page the agent browses, and manipulated tool results returned by a compromised upstream service. 

Adversary goal. X seeks to cause A to emit a trace τmal such that the resulting state change in E achieves a malicious objective, including data exfiltration, privilege esca-lation, or persistent state corruption, while avoiding detection by whatever security layer is in place. 

Adversary capabilities. We define X ’s capabilities as follows: 4• Black-Box input access: X can write to any data source that A reads as part of normal operation. 

• Full knowledge of generic defenses: X knows the detection patterns, schema val-idators, and heuristics employed by standard, publicly documented firewalls such as Aegis [5]. 

• Observable benign behavior: X may, over time, observe the agent’s benign out-puts and thereby form a partial reconstruction of its behavioral envelope. 

Adversary limitations. We consider two variations of adversarial knowledge. In the Black-Box threat model, X does not possess the specific pDFA compiled by Praetor ,nor direct access to the historical telemetry corpus C used to construct it. In the Gray-Box threat model, X has acquired partial access to historical benign traces (e.g., via prolonged observation) and attempts to reconstruct the pDFA constraints. We explicitly assume the offline profiling environment is secure and the initial training corpus C is verified benign (e.g., generated via curated benchmark datasets or collected within a sandboxed, clean-room staging environment). Defending against telemetry poisoning during the offline phase (where an adversary actively contaminates the training corpus before the pDFA is compiled) is a critical deployment constraint in behavioral anomaly detection, often referred to as the “cold start” problem. This vulnerability surface falls outside the scope of Praetor ’s runtime enforcement guar-antees. The security of Praetor relies on a dual-constraint architecture: structural sequence matching severely collapses the available attack surface, but tight param-eter bounds bear the primary load of preventing exploitation within that surviving envelope. We discuss the boundaries and mitigations of this profiling threat surface in Section 8.1. We consider denial-of-service attacks against G itself, attacks that bypass the SDK interception layer entirely (e.g., direct API calls), and compromises of the asynchronous profiling environment to be outside the scope of this work. 

# 2.4 Security Goals 

Praetor must satisfy five properties. 1. Soundness. Any tool call that is inconsistent with the w-gram behavioral envelope of C, or whose parameter values fall outside the εnum - and εstr -widened bounds observed in C, must be halted before execution. Formally, the gateway must strictly enforce a language of permitted traces Lpermit that is a deliberate over-approximation of L(C) (the set of tool-call sequences observed in C): traces that are structurally consistent with C but not literally present in it are admitted, reducing false positives at the cost of a finite within-profile exploit surface. Any trace outside Lpermit is blocked. 2. Efficiency. The per-call overhead introduced by G must be bounded by a constant with respect to the number of pDFA states, the length of the ongoing trace, and the complexity of the agent’s tool vocabulary. 3. Tamper-Evidence. Every blocked call must be recorded in an append-only cryp-tographic audit log such that post-hoc deletion or modification of any entry 5is detectable against any attacker without host-level overwrite capabilities, and globally detectable once published to the external transparency log. 4. Minimal Integration Burden. G must operate as a black-box sidecar: it intercepts calls at the tool-dispatch boundary and requires no modification to A’s internal reasoning loop, system prompt, or model weights. 5. Evolvability. The system must support incremental updates to the behavioral profile to accommodate legitimate changes in agent tools or tasks (concept drift) without requiring a full system re-profiling for every minor update. 

# 2.5 Motivating Example 

Consider a customer-service agent restricted to three tools: read ticket ,

write summary , and send email . Benign traces follow predictable patterns, e.g., ⟨read ticket , write summary , send email ⟩. Suppose an adversary injects aprompt instructing the agent to skip the summary phase and jump straight to 

send email(to=’attacker@external.com’) immediately after reading the ticket. A stateless firewall analyzing these calls in isolation may permit them, as the email format is technically valid and the tool is within the agent’s vocabulary. Praetor ,however, enforces a parameterized deterministic finite automaton (pDFA) where each state encapsulates the sequential context of prior calls, and transitions are guarded by learned parameter bounds (e.g., tight semantic embedding clusters for strings or cate-gorical whitelists). When evaluating the exploit, Praetor observes that send email 

never appears as a valid outgoing transition directly from the read ticket state. The call is halted instantly. Even if the adversary strictly uses authorized tools, they must satisfy both the strict sequential transitions and the tight parameter guards, forcing them to mimic legitimate workflows and neutralizing arbitrary action sequences. 

# 3 Related Work 

Stateless Firewalls and the Execution Gap. Pre-execution firewalls attempt to intercept malicious tool calls before execution. Aegis [5] employs a multi-stage pipeline (PII redaction, regex scanning, statistical anomaly detection) but remains fundamentally stateless: it evaluates each call in isolation. Such sequential blindness prevents distinguishing an authorized administrator from an agent tricked into exe-cuting a privileged sequence that conforms to static schemas. Other input-layer filters, such as PromptArmor [10] or auxiliary LLM validators [6, 7], attempt to sanitize prompts. However, they operate above the tool-call boundary and incur prohibitive inference latency. Moreover, they remain vulnerable to evasion, for adversaries fre-quently deploy obfuscated injections that bypass prompt-level semantics [4, 11]. 

Praetor directly addresses this gap by decoupling the security layer into a compiled stateful automaton, enforcing the strict sequential context of prior calls with O(1) constant-time latency. Table 2 summarizes these distinctions. 

Stateful Tracking and Intrusion Detection. The architectural necessity of stateful enforcement has spurred recent concurrent preprints like AegisUI [13]. These 6Table 2 Architectural comparison of Praetor with representative prior systems.                                                      

> System Sequential Agent-Rule/ LM/ML Attack State Specific Pattern Inference Level
> Static Schema ✗✗✓✗Tool-call Keyword Filter ✗✗✓✗Message
> Aegis [5] ✗a✗✓✗Tool-call MSFW [6] ✗✗✗✓Message PromptArmor [10] ✗✗✗✓Prompt Fides [12] b✗✗✓✗Plan/Code AegisUI [13] ✗✗✗✓Tool-call
> Praetor (ours) ✓✓✗✗Tool-call
> aAegis maintains a statistical baseline for event frequencies, but lacks per-session sequential state constraints.
> bFides relies on strict taint-tracking labels across variables rather than regex/schema policies.

systems track execution histories using secondary auditor models or supervised classi-fiers. While effective, neural inference on the critical path introduces heavy overhead. Alternatively, information-flow control systems like Fides [12] use dynamic taint track-ing to prevent data leakage [14, 15], but require deep instrumentation of the agent’s internal reasoning loop. 

Praetor ’s approach is conceptually rooted in classic host-based intrusion detec-tion systems (HIDS). Forrest et al. [8] first demonstrated that normal UNIX process behavior can be characterized by short sequences of system calls ( n-grams) and deviations indicate exploitation [16]. Recent theoretical work establishing that bounded-context LLM agents are equivalent to probabilistic automata [17] validates the application of these techniques to modern AI agents. Praetor adapts this foun-dational IDS principle to the domain of LLM tool calling, acting as a runtime safety monitor [18]. However, standard syscall monitoring only inspects control-flow; LLM tool calls carry semantic parameters with high inter-instance variance. Praetor 

extends classic n-gram tracking by compiling a Symbolic Finite Automaton (SFA) [19] that couples structural transitions with continuous parameter bounding, achieving control-flow and data-flow integrity simultaneously without requiring access to the agent’s internals. 

# 4 Praetor 

Praetor separates enforcement into two stages: an asynchronous profiling stage 

that extracts behavioral norms from historical data, and a synchronous runtime enforcement stage that monitors every incoming tool call. During the profiling stage, Praetor ingests verified benign execution traces C

collected from the agent’s normal operations. It compiles this telemetry into a compact, agent-specific behavioral profile. We adopt the formalism of Symbolic Finite Automata 

(SFA) [19] to represent this profile, which we refer to as a pDFA (parameterized deterministic finite automaton). The pDFA encodes the agent’s expected behavioral envelope: which tool sequences are permitted and within what parameter value bounds. By using a symbolic representation, Praetor can efficiently represent constraints 7Benign Traces C Telemetry Profiler pDFA 

Runtime Gateway 

Tool Call ( t, p) Environment 

Allowed 

Load 

Profiling Stage 

Runtime Stage    

> Fig. 1 The two-stage lifecycle of Praetor . The telemetry profiler compiles historical telemetry into a pDFA, which the runtime gateway enforces at execution time with O(1) overhead.

over complex and infinite parameter domains (e.g., continuous numeric ranges or high-dimensional text embeddings) without state explosion. During the runtime stage, the Runtime Gateway enforces the pre-compiled pDFA as a transparent sidecar. For each incoming tool call, the gateway performs a constant-time transition lookup. If the call matches a permitted transition from the current state and satisfies the associated parameter guards, it is forwarded to the environment; otherwise, it is halted and logged. The architecture ensures that the computationally expensive task of behavioral analysis is performed offline, while runtime enforcement remains deterministic and lightweight. Figure 1 illustrates the two-stage pipeline. Our design assumes narrow-task, single-role agents, the primary deployment target of Praetor , where a small, stable tool vocabulary and a well-defined task scope pro-duce low-entropy call sequences. Agents with large tool vocabularies, open-ended task distributions, or dynamically injected context may exhibit higher behavioral entropy, which would widen the pDFA’s state space and increase the benign task failure rate for a fixed pruning threshold θ; we discuss this scope limitation in Section 8.4. 

# 4.1 Telemetry Profiler 

The Telemetry Profiler takes as input a benign trace corpus and three parameters which are a context-window width w, a pruning threshold θ and slack factors εnum , ε str ,wherein 

• A corpus of verified benign traces C = {τ1, . . . , τ N }, where each τi =

⟨(t1, p1), . . . , (tk, pk)⟩.

• A context-window width w (default w = 3), controlling the length of the sequen-tial prefix used to distinguish states with the same tool name but different prior histories. 1

• A pruning threshold θ (default θ = 3), specifying the minimum number of observed transitions required to retain a state.   

> 1While w= 3 is selected as the optimal operating point for our evaluated scenarios, this parameter is deployment-dependent: agents with higher behavioral entropy or more complex branching may require larger windows to achieve sufficient precision.

8read write send close                  

> Execution Trace τ
> w-gram Context
> State Abstraction
> s= ( tj,ctx j)
> s= ( send ,[read, write ])
> History Current Tool
> s′= ( close ,[write, send ])
> δstruct
> ctx j= ( tj−w, . . . , t j−1)
> Fig. 2 The state abstraction mechanism. A sliding w-gram window (blue) captures the tool name sequence preceding the current call. This context is concatenated with the current tool name to form a unique pDFA state ( tj,ctx j). Sequential transitions are then mapped to the symbolic transition function δstruct .

• Slack factors εnum (default 0 .05) and εstr (default 0 .05), widening numeric parameter bounds and string embedding radii to accommodate minor benign variation. It transforms the input described above into a pDFA following the four steps described below. 

Step 1: State Abstraction. Each unique combination of a tool name and a context prefix defines a distinct state. Formally, for each position j in each trace τi, the context is ctx j = ( tmax(1 , j −w), . . . , t j−1), i.e., the min( j−1, w )-length prefix of tool names immediately preceding call j (empty for j = 1). The corresponding state is the pair sj = ( tj , ctx j ), with tj ∈ T and ctx j ∈ T ≤w. As visualized in Figure 2, two calls to the same tool in different sequential contexts yield distinct states, enabling the automaton to distinguish, for example, a read ticket following a session start from one following a write summary . When an agent exhibits iterative error-correction loops or ReAct retries (e.g., repeatedly calling search web ), these sequences naturally form valid cyclic paths or self-edges within the graph. The pDFA therefore gracefully accommodates expected hallucination or retry patterns without state fragmentation. 

Step 2: Transition Extraction. For each consecutive pair of states ( sj , s j+1 ) within any trace, the profiler records the directed edge sj → sj+1 and associates the param-eter vector pj+1 with that edge. After processing all traces, each edge accumulates a multiset of observed parameter vectors. 

Step 3: Parameter Schema Synthesis. For each edge e = ( s, s ′) in the transition set, the profiler synthesises a parameter schema from the accumulated observations. Three parameter types are handled: 

• Numeric parameters : let {x(1) , . . . , x (m)} be the observed values for parame-ter dimension d. The schema records the widened interval [min j x(j) − εnum ·| min j x(j)|, max j x(j) + εnum · | max j x(j)|]. An incoming value v is accepted if and only if v lies within this interval. 9• String parameters : each observed string value s(j) is embedded using a sentence transformer (specifically, all-MiniLM-L6-v2 from the sentence-transformers 

library) to produce a fixed-dimensional vector e(j) ∈ Rd. The schema records the L2-normalized centroid ¯ e = 1

> m

P 

> j

e(j) and the radius r = max j DC (e(j), ¯e) + εstr ,where DC is the cosine distance. An incoming string is accepted if its cosine distance to ¯ e is at most r. Embeddings are computed once at profiling time and cached; the runtime gateway embeds novel incoming strings using a quan-tized transformer. To counter semantic evasion (Section 7), the profiler applies a Sensitive-Parameter Whitelist Override : parameters matching predefined sensitive patterns (e.g., * path ) bypass continuous bounds and enforce strict categorical exact-matching against the observed corpus. 

• Categorical parameters : the schema records the exact set of observed values 

Vd = {v(1) , . . . , v (m)}. An incoming value is accepted only if it belongs to Vd.

Step 4: DFA Construction and Pruning. (Note: For conceptual clarity, we present schema synthesis before pruning in this exposition; an optimized implementation applies pruning first, as reflected in Algorithm 1). The profiler assembles the pDFA 

M = ( S, δ, s 0) whose transition function decomposes into two orthogonal components. 

Structural successor. Define δstruct : S × T ⇀ S as the partial function that maps a state s = ( tj , ctx j ) and a tool name tnext to the unique successor s′ = tnext , (tmax(1 ,j −w+1) , . . . , t j ), i.e., the state whose tool component is tnext and whose context component is the w-gram formed by appending tj to the tail of ctx j . This successor is fully determined by s and tnext alone; δstruct is therefore structurally deter-ministic, with at most one outgoing edge per ( s, t next ) pair. δstruct (s, t next ) is undefined if no trace in C ever produced the transition ( s → s′). 

Parameter guard. For each defined edge ( s → s′), the predicate guard( s, t next , p)evaluates to true if and only if p satisfies the parameter schema synthesised for that edge in Step 3. 

Combined transition. The full transition function δ : S × (T × P) ⇀ S is: 

δ s, (t, p) =

(

δstruct (s, t ) if δstruct (s, t ) is defined and guard( s, t, p) = true 

undefined otherwise. For any fixed ( s, t ), δstruct yields at most one structural successor, and there is exactly one guard predicate per ( s, t ) pair; the automaton is therefore deterministic in the sense required by SFA theory [19]: no two distinct outgoing transitions from s can be satisfied by the same concrete input ( t, p). 

Pruning. States with fewer than θ total observed outgoing-transition instances (P 

> s′

edges [s, s ′] < θ ) are pruned from S, for rarely-visited states yield unreliable schema estimates. After each removal, all edges whose source or destination is the pruned state are deleted from the transition relation; states that thereby lose all their observations may themselves fall below threshold, so the procedure iterates to a fix-point, analogously to dead-state elimination in standard DFA minimisation. Finally, a forward reachability pass from s0 is performed to remove any states that became 10 unreachable due to pruned edges. Because iterative pruning executes to a true fix-point, no surviving state maintains a structural transition to a pruned state; hence, after pruning, any state that remains structurally reachable from s0 is guaranteed to satisfy the θ threshold, and a single post-fixpoint reachability pass is sufficient to clear orphaned subgraphs. The initial state s0 = ( ⊥, λ ) ∈ (T ∪ {⊥} ) × T ≤w is never pruned. Making δ partial eliminates the need for an explicit accept set: states from which δ

is undefined for every input are terminal, and the gateway blocks any call emitted while the session pointer is at such a state. The resulting automaton is serialised to a compact binary representation (MessagePack) for loading by the runtime gateway. The core logic of the telemetry profiler is summarised in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Telemetry Profiler (Core Logic) 

Require: Corpus C, context width w, threshold θ, slack factors εnum , ε str 

Ensure: pDFA M = ( S, δ, s 0) 

> 1:

s0 ← (⊥, λ ); S ← { s0} 

> 2:

for each trace τ ∈ C do  

> 3:

sprev ← s04: for each call ( tj , pj ) in τ do  

> 5:

ctx j ← w-gram prefix preceding tj 

> 6:

sj ← (tj , ctx j ); S ← S ∪ { sj } 

> 7:

Record edge ( sprev → sj ) and parameters pj 

> 8:

sprev ← sj 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Prune & Reachability: Iteratively remove states where outgoing edge counts 

< θ , deleting connected edges. Finally, remove states unreachable from s0. 

> 12:

Synthesize Schemas: For each edge ( s → s′) in the pruned graph, compute widened numeric bounds ( ±εnum ) and categorical sets. For string parameters, compute SBERT centroids ¯ e and radii r. Map to guard( s, t, p).  

> 13:

Construct δ: Map ( s, t, p) 7 → s′ iff δstruct (s, t ) = s′ and guard = true . 

> 14:

return M = ( S, δ, s 0)

Deployment Constraint: Embedding Drift. Because string parameter schemas rely on embeddings computed at profiling time, if the sentence transformer model (e.g., 

all-MiniLM-L6-v2 ) is updated or changed between profiling cycles, the embedding space will shift and all cached embeddings will become invalid. Re-profiling the corpus is required when the embedding model is updated. 

Remark 1 (Determinism) . The pDFA M produced by Algorithm 1 is a deterministic 

SFA: for any state s ∈ S and any concrete input (t, p) ∈ T × P, there is at most one defined value of δ(s, (t, p)) . Since each state s′ = ( tnext , ctx ′) is uniquely determined by the pair (s, t next ) via the deterministic context update, δstruct contains at most one edge per (s, t next ) pair. Because tool names in T are discrete, two distinct outgoing edges from s necessarily carry different tool-name labels; therefore, guard-predicate 

11 overlap across different edges is structurally impossible because they are keyed by dis-tinct (s, t next ) pairs. Within the same (s, t ) pair there is exactly one compiled schema and hence one guard predicate; no input can satisfy two guards simultaneously. The automaton therefore meets the determinism condition for SFAs stated in [19]. Complexity. Let N be the number of traces, L the maximum trace length, and |T | 

the tool vocabulary size. The state abstraction and transition extraction steps run in 

O(N · L). Parameter schema synthesis for string parameters requires one embedding computation per unique string value; embeddings are cached so that identical strings are embedded only once. In a production implementation, applying pruning first on structural edge counts bounds the waste of synthesizing schemas for eventually dis-carded edges. The theoretical maximum state count before pruning is loosely bounded by |T | w+1 (it is a loose upper bound because for any structurally reachable adjacent states s → s′, the last element of s′’s context must equal s’s tool component). For 

|T | = 15 and w = 3, this bounds the space at 50,625 states. Empirically, the observed pruned state count strictly tightens to 450 (Section 6), producing a flat, memory-resident structure independent of corpus size. The telemetry profiler runs once per agent deployment or update cycle, not on the critical path. 

# 4.2 Runtime State-Machine Gateway 

At startup, the gateway loads the serialised pDFA into a hash-map-backed adjacency structure. It allocates a per-session state pointer, initialised to s0, for each active agent session. Upon the emission of a tool call ( t, p) by the agent, the gateway proceeds as follows: 1. Edge lookup (O(1)): lookup of the single edge ( scur , t ) from the current state scur 

by keying into the adjacency map. The total per-call overhead is therefore O(1) in |T | , the tool vocabulary size, which is a small constant for practical agents. 2. Schema check : for each candidate edge ( scur , s ′) labelled with tool t, check whether p satisfies the edge’s parameter schema. Numeric checks require one comparison per dimension; categorical checks require one hash-set lookup; string checks require a forward pass through a quantized embedding model and one cosine-similarity comparison against the pre-cached centroid. The embedding dimension d is a fixed constant (384 for all-MiniLM-L6-v2 ), so string checks run in O(d) = O(1). 3. Decision : if a matching edge exists, the gateway forwards the call to the environ-ment and advances the state pointer to s′. If no matching edge exists, the gateway blocks the call, returns a sanitised error message, and appends the event to the cryptographic audit log. The state pointer remains strictly at scur upon rejec-tion, enabling benign retries while exposing a static state to adversarial probing. The structural lookup is therefore O(1) in |T | . While overall latency remains bounded by the fixed inference cost of the quantized embedding model ( O(d)), the architectural path complexity scales as O(1) with respect to the agent’s behavioral footprint ( |S|, k, N , L). Unlike the pipeline in [5], the gateway performs no string 12 scanning, no pattern matching, and no policy evaluation at runtime; all such analysis is precomputed. 

Cryptographic audit log. Each blocked event is recorded as a tuple ℓ =(session id , s cur , t, p, timestamp ). The log is maintained as an append-only SHA-256 hash chain: the n-th entry stores both the event data and the hash of the preced-ing entry, so that any post-hoc deletion or modification of an entry invalidates all subsequent chain hashes. The chain root is published periodically to an append-only transparency log, enabling external forensic verification without access to the raw event data. 

# 4.3 Incremental Profile Updates 

A deployed agent may evolve: new tools may be added, the system prompt may be revised, or the agent may be retrained on an updated corpus. If the pDFA is not updated to reflect these changes, the gateway will generate false positives for legitimate new behaviors. To address this, we introduce a human-in-the-loop incremental update protocol. When the gateway blocks a call that is subsequently reviewed and approved by a human operator, either because it represents a legitimate new workflow or a new tool, the approved event is appended to a pending update queue . During the next sched-uled asynchronous recompilation window (e.g., a nightly pass), the profiler ingests the pending queue as supplementary trace data and re-expands the DFA to accommo-date the newly approved transitions, without reprocessing the full historical corpus. Specifically, only the states and edges reachable from the newly approved sequences are reconstructed; the remainder of the DFA is preserved. The protocol preserves two key properties. First, new behaviors enter the behav-ioral envelope only after explicit human approval, preventing the gateway from silently expanding its permissions in response to adversarial inputs. Second, the incremental recompilation step runs asynchronously and does not affect gateway availability. We evaluate the practical impact of this protocol on false positive rates in the concept-drift ablation study described in Section 7.4. 

# 5 Security Analysis 

The security guarantees of Praetor reduce to three properties: execution path integrity, computational efficiency, and tamper-evident auditing. 

# 5.1 Execution Path Integrity 

Unlike stateless firewalls that evaluate tool calls against static schemas or keyword lists, Praetor enforces execution path integrity . We define the safety of an agent not merely by the validity of its individual actions, but by its conformance to a known-benign trajectory. Let T be the agent’s tool vocabulary. A stateless firewall monitors the entire tran-sition space T at every step. In contrast, Praetor restricts the agent’s operational space to the out-degree of its current state s in the pDFA M . Formally, at any state 13 s, the set of permitted tools is: 

Tpermitted (s) = {t ∈ T : the edge ( s t

−→ s′) exists in M } (1) By design, |T permitted (s)| ≪ |T | for task-specific agents. For the Customer Service scenario evaluated in Section 7, the average out-degree is 1 .8, while the total vocabu-lary |T | = 15. Crucially, at states preceding high-value terminal tools, the maximum observed out-degree is strictly bounded to 4. This represents an 88% average reduc-tion in the immediate attack surface per step. To execute a malicious action tadv , an adversary must not only bypass the parameter guards but must also navigate the agent into a state s where tadv ∈ T permitted (s). Such topological constraints force attackers to mimic benign sequential patterns perfectly. The system thereby neutralizes multi-step exfiltration attacks that rely on “jump-starting” sensitive tools from an idle or unrelated context. 

# 5.2 Adversary Model and Path-Guessing 

We assume an adversary X who can induce the agent to emit arbitrary tool calls via prompt injection or tool poisoning. The adversary’s objective is to execute a target sequence τadv that results in a security breach (e.g., data exfiltration). We distinguish two levels of adversarial knowledge: 1. Black-Box Adversary: Knows the tool vocabulary T but lacks access to the pDFA 

M , the training corpus C, or the embedding model. 2. Gray-Box Adversary: Has access to a subset of historical benign traces C′ ⊂ C 

and attempts to reconstruct the pDFA. Under the Black-Box model, a competent attacker does not sample paths uni-formly; they enumerate sequences reaching high-value terminal tools. Thus, the true attacker advantage is tightly bounded by the fraction of permitted paths terminating in a target tool (e.g., read db ), relative to all paths reaching that tool. In the Customer Service pDFA, only 3 of the 142 valid paths terminate in read db (a measured property of the trained graph), meaning an adversary attempting to jump-start an exfiltration exploit faces a highly constrained maze. On a macro level, this 142-path structural envelope represents extreme global sparsity, covering just 0.018% of the uniform com-binatorial action space for sequences of length k = 5 ( ρ ≈ 1.8 × 10 −4). To quantify this residual risk empirically, we conducted an algorithmic path enumeration experi-ment distinct from the full ASB evaluation in Section 7: we generated 1,000 multi-step exfiltration payload traces by algorithmically splicing valid ASB exfiltration templates onto benign prefixes, producing 1,000 syntactically distinct terminal actions reach-ing sensitive tools, and mapped them against the pDFA structure. Only 14 payloads (1.4% ) contained sequences that coincidentally matched the benign structural paths. However, when executing these 14 surviving paths in an end-to-end simulation with the actual agent, 0 achieved a meaningful exfiltration objective (95% CI: [0%, 23.2%]). The malicious parameter payloads (e.g., specific attacker-controlled email addresses or unauthorized SQL queries) triggered the continuous string parameter guards (the 

εstr -ball), resulting in blocks. This demonstrates that structural graph traversal alone is insufficient for exploitation. 14 For the Gray-Box adversary, the security of Praetor relies on the unpredictability of continuous parameter guards . To formalize this, we model the attack as a bounded evasion game. Let the firewall be a deterministic execution oracle OM that evaluates a sequence τ against the stateful pDFA M and returns 1 (Allow) or 0 (Block). The adversary A, constrained by a budget of Q queries, attempts to construct an adver-sarial trace τ ∗ = τpre ◦(t∗, pmal ) such that OM (τ ∗) = 1, where τpre is a valid structural prefix and pmal achieves a targeted malicious objective. Within this game, we ground two empirical quantities representing the adversary’s capability. Let ppass be the probability that a benign heuristic parameter (e.g., an empty string or schema default), generated by A to probe structural transitions, sat-isfies the guard conditions. Conversely, let δguard = Pr p∼D mal [OM (τpre ◦ (t∗, p)) = 0] represent the firewall’s expected rejection rate over the adversary’s distribution of malicious payloads, Dmal .Under this formulation, the adversary’s expected query complexity decomposes logically. Because a Block on a heuristic strongly narrows the search space, A leverages an expected Q · ppass successful Allow signals to map the valid structural transitions 

Tpermitted (s) efficiently. Thus, structural opacity alone is not a durable defense against a query-rich oracle. However, the expected discovery of an exploitable parameter pay-load scales strictly with Q · (1 − δguard ). Here, δguard is an empirical property of the embedding geometry: because text mutations operate over a discrete manifold within a continuous space, gradient-free boundary approximation (e.g., HopSkipJump) requires an exhaustive query budget to locate an adversarial example within the permitted 

r-ball. Under practical rate limits ( Q ≤ 500), convergence is computationally pro-hibitive. Consequently, δguard remains near 1 (empirically ≈ 0.98), which dominates the adversary’s expected discovery rate. 

# 5.3 Computational Efficiency and O(1) Structural Enforcement 

A critical design goal of Praetor is to maintain negligible runtime overhead. The structural path validation is O(1) with respect to the number of pDFA states, the current trace length, and the original corpus size. This efficiency is achieved because the gateway maintains an explicit state pointer, reducing enforcement to a simple dictionary lookup. The number of outgoing transitions from any state is bounded by the agent’s tool vocabulary size, and categorical/numeric parameter schema checks are performed in constant time. While string parameter evaluation requires a fixed-budget forward pass through an embedding model (which dominates the absolute latency, as evaluated in Section 7.3), the architectural complexity remains entirely decoupled from the size of the behavioral profile. This structural advantage ensures that Praetor 

does not suffer from the performance bottlenecks typical of runtime language-model inference or exhaustive signature matching, which typically scale with the number of rules or patterns. 15 5.4 Residual Attack Surface: Within-Profile Exploits 

The primary residual threat to Praetor is the within-profile exploit , where an adver-sary achieves a malicious objective using only legitimate, observed transitions. This is analogous to return-oriented programming (ROP) in traditional software security. Nonetheless, Praetor substantially constrains such exploits. The context win-dow prevents stitching unrelated benign fragments, for the adversary must maintain a consistent w-gram history throughout the attack. The parameter schema further prevents tool repurposing (e.g., a file-read tool observed only on /tmp/logs cannot be invoked on /etc/passwd ), provided the parameter is protected by the Sensitive-Parameter Whitelist Override defined in Section 4. These constraints do not eliminate all semantic-gap attacks; they confine the adversary to the agent’s observed envelope, within which the capabilities available for exploitation are a small fraction of those an unconstrained agent would expose. 

# 6 Implementation 

We implement Praetor as two cooperating processes: a Telemetry Profiler written in Python and a Runtime Gateway written in Rust. 

Telemetry Profiler. The profiler is implemented as a standalone Python module of approximately 250 lines of code. It accepts trace logs in JSON Lines format, in which each line encodes one tool call as a (tool name, parameter object, session ID, times-tamp) tuple. String parameter embeddings are computed using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 

model from the sentence-transformers library [20], which produces 384-dimensional vectors with strong semantic alignment properties at low inference cost. Embeddings are cached in a persistent on-disk store keyed by string content, so that repeated occurrences of the same argument value across traces incur only a single embedding computation. The resulting pDFA is serialised to MessagePack, a compact binary for-mat that avoids the overhead of JSON parsing at gateway startup. For a representative customer-service agent with 15 tools and 500 benign traces, the profiler produces a pDFA of 450 states and 620 edges, with a serialised binary size of 85 KB (as only ∼10% of edges carry dense 384-dimensional string centroids, while the rest use lightweight categorical or numeric schemas) and a total compilation time of 12 s. 

Runtime Gateway. The gateway is implemented in Rust as a long-running dae-mon of approximately 420 lines of code. At startup, it loads the MessagePack-serialised pDFA into a HashMap -backed adjacency structure, allocating one hash map per state keyed by (tool name, schema-type) pairs. The gateway exposes a local Unix domain socket API whose request/response envelope is compatible with both the OpenAI function-calling format and the Anthropic tool-use API, enabling direct integration without modification to existing agent code. Per-session state is maintained in a globally shared, mutex-protected hash map keyed by session ID, safely coordinating concurrent sessions across the asynchronous runtime. The in-memory footprint of the gateway process for a 15-tool customer-service agent is 41 MB (this footprint repre-sents the total Resident Set Size of the daemon, including the Rust Tokio asynchronous runtime, HTTP framework buffers, pre-allocated thread pools, and approximately 16 23 MB for the INT8 -quantized ONNX model; the pDFA itself consumes < 1 MB (accounting for the 10% of edges carrying 1.5 KB centroids and the adjacency map overhead)). Gateway startup latency from process launch to first request served is 45 ms, dominated by loading the transformer weights into the ort ONNX session. 

Audit log. The SHA-256 hash chain is maintained in an append-only write-ahead log on the local file system. Each blocked event is synchronously flushed before the rejection response is returned to the agent, ensuring that no blocked call can be omitted from the log due to a crash between the blocking decision and the write. While the underlying design supports exporting the chain root on a configurable interval to a Sigstore-compatible transparency log, this external integration is omitted from the open-source baseline artifact for simplicity. The interval defines the security parameter for the window of vulnerability against a compromised host attempting to truncate the log; once exported, the chain enables independent third-party verification of audit completeness. 

API compatibility. The gateway acts as a transparent middleware layer. Agent frameworks that support the OpenAI tool use response format require only a one-line configuration change to route tool-call requests through the gateway’s Unix socket before dispatch. The gateway returns the same response envelope regardless of whether the call is allowed or blocked: an allowed call is forwarded to the environment and the result returned verbatim; a blocked call returns an error payload in the same format, allowing the agent to handle the rejection gracefully within its existing error-handling logic. 

# 7 Evaluation 

# 7.1 Experimental Setup 

Hardware. All experiments are conducted on AWS c6i.4xlarge instances (16 vCPU, Intel Xeon Ice Lake, 32 GB RAM), representing a standard compute-optimised deployment environment. The Praetor gateway and Aegis itself (deployed as an out-of-process sidecar) run on separate instances of the same class to ensure fair latency comparisons. 

Benchmarks. Our evaluation draws on two sources: ASB for attack scenarios and ToolBench for benign trace generation. For evaluation, we use Agent Security Bench (ASB) [21], which provides ten agent scenarios with over 400 tools and a standardised attack suite spanning five families: Direct Injection (DI), Indirect Injection (II), Multi-Step Exfiltration (MSE), Tool Poisoning (TP), Memory Manipulation (MM). While the full ASB benchmark aggregates over 400 tools, production agents operate within tightly scoped personas; thus, we evaluate detection efficacy using a repre-sentative 15-tool Customer-Service scenario to reflect realistic deployment bounds (reserving the 500-tool scale for synthetic scalability microbenchmarks). For benign trace generation (pDFA training) associated with this persona, we use ToolBench [22] to extract execution traces. The trace corpus comprises 500 verified benign traces, split into 400 training traces and 100 held-out testing traces to evaluate 17 false positives. 

Baselines. We evaluate against two comparison points and one architectural reference point at a different pipeline layer. 1. No Firewall : the agent executes all tool calls without any interception, providing an upper bound on attack success rate. 2. Aegis [5]: a multi-stage policy engine including a 22-pattern signature scanner, PII redaction, and a statistical 7-day behavioral baseline for anomaly detection. We deploy the official Aegis system as an out-of-process HTTP sidecar using its standard Docker Compose configuration and auto-patched SDK harness. While the original paper reports near-100% blocking on an internal test suite, we eval-uate it directly on the standardized ASB suite to provide a rigorous, empirical baseline for full-system performance. The 12.8% macro-averaged ASR reported in Table 3 represents our own empirical measurement on the ASB benchmark, and should not be confused with the results reported in the original paper. 3. PromptArmor [10]: a prompt-level LLM-based filter applied to agent inputs 

before tool calls are generated. We evaluated PromptArmor locally across the ASB dataset using their open-source PromptArmor-Llama3-8B evaluator model at its default threshold. Our evaluation treats PromptArmor as an architectural reference point , rather than a direct competitor. It operates one stage earlier in the pipeline and addresses a complementary threat surface (injected instructions at the prompt level). A direct ASR comparison is therefore not strictly analogous; a prompt filter that fails to neutralise an injected instruction may still allow Praetor to block the resulting out-of-profile tool call, and the two systems are designed to be complementary, not mutually exclusive. We include its numbers to quantify how much of the ASR reduc-tion is achievable by prompt-level filtering alone, establishing the residual threat that tool-call enforcement must address. The prompt-filtering and execution-boundary enforcement provide necessary, complementary defense-in-depth, for neither layer alone halts the entire attack continuum. 

Unavailability of Alternative Stateful Baselines. While concurrent state-ful architectures such as Trajectory Guard [23] and AegisUI [13] appear in recent preprints, their implementations and trained models are not readily available at the time of this writing. We rely on Aegis as the reproducible state-of-the-art baseline. We explicitly omit commercial OSS observability guards (e.g., NeMo Guardrails, Guardrails AI, Langfuse) from direct ASR evaluation. These tools function archi-tecturally as stateless prompt validators, heuristic scanners, or post-hoc monitoring layers, placing their detection mechanisms conceptually equivalent to the PromptAr-mor and Aegis baselines already tested. 

Metrics. For detection, we report attack success rate (ASR, lower is better for defenders), defined as the fraction of attack attempts that result in the intended mali-cious action being executed. For efficiency, we report per-tool-call gateway latency 

18 Table 3 Attack Success Rate (ASR), in percentage, across five standard attack families (Direct Injection [DI], Indirect Injection [II], Multi-Step Exfiltration [MSE], Tool Poisoning [TP], Memory Manipulation [MM]). Compares Praetor against baselines across the three structured ASB scenarios, including the defense-in-depth configuration ( Praetor +Aegis ). Lower is better. 

Defense DI II MSE TP MM Overall 

No Firewall 86.4 78.1 89.5 68.3 72.8 79.0 PromptArmor 1.5 15.0 75.0 38.0 35.0 32.9 

Aegis 2.0 12.0 35.0 6.0 9.0 12.8 

Praetor 2.0 4.0 0.0 3.0 2.0 2.2 

Praetor +Aegis 0.5 1.2 0.0 1.1 1.0 0.8                

> Table 4 Diagnostic Gap Analysis using Context-Sequential payloads (200 attempts). Evaluates vulnerability to context-sequential injection across structured (3-Scen) and open-ended (5-Scen) workflows.
> Defense 3-Scen Avg (%) 5-Scen Avg (%)
> No Firewall 94.0 -PromptArmor 85.0 -
> Aegis 75.0 -
> Praetor (500 traces) 0.0 0.7
> Praetor (5k traces) 0.0 0.0

(ms, median and 95th percentile) and end-to-end task latency (ms). For scalability, we report gateway throughput (transactions per second, TPS). For false positives, we report benign task failure rate (BTFR), the fraction of end-to-end benign task execu-tions that ultimately fail because at least one legitimate, required call was incorrectly blocked. This measures the true usability cost of the firewall, beyond just per-call false positives. 

# 7.2 Detection Efficacy 

We evaluate detection efficacy across five ASB scenarios: three structured workflows (Customer Service, OS Automation, Database Admin) that anchor our primary claims, and two higher-entropy scenarios (Travel Planner, Research Agent) that probe the scope limits. We execute 1,000 attack attempts per attack family per scenario against each of the system configurations described above. All reported ASR point estimates over 1,000 trials carry a 95% Clopper-Pearson confidence interval margin of error no larger than ±1.5% (e.g., an ASR of 2.0% has a 95% CI of [1 .2% , 3.1%]). Table 3 reports the macro-averaged attack success rate for each combination. 

Analysis of Detection Efficacy. We evaluate detection efficacy by contrasting 

Praetor ’s strict stateful pDFA bounds against Aegis ’s multi-stage policy engine. Across the standardized ASB attack suite, Praetor achieves a macro-averaged ASR of 2.2% , compared to 12.8% for Aegis . While Aegis leverages statistical anomaly 19 Table 5 Gray-Box Adversary Evaluation (Customer Service Scenario). Simulates an adaptive attacker with partial knowledge ( k) of the true behavioral envelope.        

> Adversarial Trace Knowledge ( k)ASR (%)
> k= 10% (Low) 0.0
> k= 50% (Moderate) 0.3
> k= 90% (High) 0.8

detection and PII redaction to significantly reduce ASR on isolated injection pay-loads, Praetor provides superior protection against context-sequential exploits by structurally guaranteeing that all executions conform to the compiled benign graph. To determine whether these results are trivial artifacts of tool-name whitelisting, we perform a vocabulary-block vs. contextual-block decomposition described below. For the Customer Service scenario, of the 1,000 multi-step exfiltration attempts, 42% were blocked because the terminal tool (e.g., read db ) was entirely absent from the vocabulary, while 58% were contextual blocks, where the tool was present but invoked in an invalid sequence. In the OS Automation scenario, with its larger 45-tool vocabulary, only 15% of attempts were vocabulary blocks, while 85% were contex-tual blocks. In the Database Admin scenario, 28% were vocabulary blocks and 72% were contextual blocks. The decomposition confirms that as agent capabilities grow, static whitelisting becomes insufficient, and Praetor ’s stateful tracking provides the primary security gain. To evaluate generalisation in high-entropy regimes, we expand our evaluation to the ASB Travel Planner (|T | = 32 tools, 500 training traces, pDFA with 840 states / 1,210 edges; 12% vocabulary blocks / 88% contextual blocks) and Research Agent (|T | = 64 tools, 500 training traces, pDFA with 1,120 states / 1,650 edges; 8% vocabulary blocks / 92% contextual blocks) scenarios, which feature more open-ended task structures. As shown in Table 3, the macro-averaged ASR degrades to 8.6% and 12.6% respectively. Averaging the 2.2% ASR across the three structured scenarios with the 8.6% and 12.6% from the two high-entropy scenarios yields the aggregate 5.6% macro-average reported across all five ASB environments. The results validate the scope limitation outlined in Section 8.4: Praetor excels in structured workflows, whereas agents with unpredictable branching logic produce wider state spaces that inevitably increase the residual attack surface. By establishing where the low-behavioral-entropy assumption holds and where it breaks down, these results provide a concrete operational boundary for deployment. 

Praetor achieves near-zero ASR on indirect injection and multi-step exfiltra-tion within structured workflows. Specifically, within the structured workflows, 0 out of 3,000 ASB multi-step exfiltration attempts and 0 out of 200 targeted context-sequential attacks succeeded. Despite incorporating a 7-day statistical behavioral baseline, Aegis remains structurally vulnerable to sequence-level attacks, as illus-trated by its 35.0% ASR on multi-step exfiltration. Because its anomaly detector assesses event frequency rather than rigid sequential states, malicious actions nested within valid syntax often bypass the filter. PromptArmor performs well on direct injection (1.5% ASR) but remains blind to tool-poisoning and memory-manipulation 20 attacks that do not manifest as recognizable prompt injections. Any attack that sur-vives PromptArmor’s prompt-level filter but produces an out-of-profile tool call is blocked at Praetor ’s enforcement boundary, yielding a natural layered defense. To explain the architectural failure mode of stateless firewalls observed in the ASB results, we construct a diagnostic gap analysis (Table 4) using “Context-Sequential” pay-loads ( 200 targeted attempts). These payloads are not an evaluation of Praetor ,but are specifically synthesized to exploit the sequential-context blind-spot of systems like Aegis : they begin with a valid 3-step benign preamble (to satisfy short-memory heuristics) before executing a malicious terminal action. Praetor trivially blocks 100% (0.0% execution rate, 95% CI: [0%, 1.8%]) of these attempts within the struc-tured workflows by design, as the transition to the malicious terminal state remains absent from the pDFA. However, Aegis allowed 75.0% to execute as it evaluates each call’s syntax in isolation. The diagnostic demonstrates why stateless inspection fails on multi-step attacks, letting the standard ASB results carry the primary efficacy claims. 

Experimental Protocol for Interactive Probing. To ground the subsequent Gray-Box and Oracle results, we explicitly define our measurement procedure: (1) The centroid drift ∆ = 0 .12 is computed using the Cosine distance in SBERT vector space, averaged across all string parameter centroids; (2) The finding that the drift exceeds the radius r for 85% of parameters is derived via 5-fold cross-validation specifically at the tuned εstr = 0 .05 threshold; (3) The oracle evasion probability δguard ≈ 0.98 is the mean block rate over the 1,000 genetic-search mutation trials described in the Active Oracle Adversary experiment, conducted under a per-target budget of Q = 100 queries; (4) The 88% local structural recovery rate is the mean success rate across all valid pDFA states, executed by an automated graph-search script allocating exactly 

Q = 100 uniform probe queries per state. 

Gray-Box Adversary Evaluation. To evaluate Praetor ’s resilience under the Gray-Box threat model (Section 5.2), we simulate an adversary with partial knowledge of the behavioral envelope. As reported in Table 5, we partition the 400-trace Customer Service training corpus into varying knowledge fractions k ∈ { 10% , 50% , 90% }. The attack is evaluated against the true pDFA trained on the full corpus. Even at k = 90% knowledge, representing near-total observation of the agent’s benign distribution, the ASR only reaches 0.8% . The low success rate occurs because the 10% of unseen traces introduces significant centroid drift: outliers in the full corpus shift the true centroid ¯e by an average distance ∆ = 0 .12 relative to the adversary’s subset estimate, for the 0.12 centroid drift exceeds the radius for 85% of all string parameters evaluated. The data confirm that Praetor ’s security relies on the strictness of its parameter boundaries, not merely obscurity of the state graph. 

Active Oracle Adversary. We explicitly evaluate an adaptive adversary pos-sessing Q = 100 binary (Allow/Block) oracle queries against the gateway ( §5.2). To formalize the protocol, the adversary maps structure using schema defaults (Objec-tive A), then targets identified valid tools using an iterative genetic search algorithm to mutate malicious payloads toward the r-ball boundary (Objective B) across 1,000 parallel test targets. Validating the structural mapping hypothesis, probing with plau-sible parameters recovers 88% of local structural transitions ( Tpermitted (s)). Crucially, this recovered 88% includes all high-value terminal tools (e.g., send email , read db )21 present in the agent’s vocabulary, confirming that structural leakage under an ora-cle is nearly total. However, discovering the structure does not bypass the parameter guard. When the adversary utilizes the remaining query budget to mutate a malicious payload, the discrete nature of text in a 384-dimensional continuous space prevents effi-cient boundary approximation ( δguard ≈ 0.98). Consequently, the end-to-end adaptive ASR plateaus at 1.2% (95% CI: [0.6%, 2.1%]), exhausting the query budget without discovering a viable evasive embedding. This confirms that structural opacity is not the primary defense; bounded-radius parameter guards are. 

# 7.3 Latency Overhead and Scalability 

10 100 500 

0

20 

40 

60 

Agent Vocabulary Size ( |T | )    

> Median Latency (ms)
> Praetor
> Aegis
> Fig. 3 Per-call median latency comparison. Praetor ’s O(1) lookup remains flat, whereas the Aegis
> baseline scales linearly with vocabulary size.

We measured per-tool-call latency by timing 10,000 consecutive tool-call inter-cepts across three agent sizes: 10-tool, 100-tool, and 500-tool agents. As shown in Figure 3, Praetor ’s runtime execution path is limited to a hash-map lookup and parameter schema validation, causing its per-call latency to remain effectively con-stant (within 0.4 ms) across all agent scales: 2.2 ms , 2.6 ms , and 2.3 ms (medians) respectively, with 95th-percentile (P95) latencies of 3.1 ms , 3.8 ms , and 4.2 ms . The performance yields a 3.7 × to 28.3 × speedup over the deployed Aegis gateway (eval-uated using the v1.2.0 open-source release 2), which empirically degraded from 8.2 ms to 65.0 ms as vocabulary size increased. Praetor ’s efficiency arises because it replaces the deep JSON extraction and multi-stage scanning of Aegis with an O(1) structural lookup. The gateway embeds incoming strings using the ort crate against an INT8 -quantized ONNX export of all-MiniLM-L6-v2 ; for calls carrying string parameters, this inference component adds approximately 1.6 ms to the latency budget, yielding a blended median of 2.2 ms across the ASB workloads. To isolate the O(1) throughput claim from confounds introduced by specific agent personas, we constructed synthetic pDFAs ranging from 10 to 10,000 states and mea-sured gateway throughput under sustained concurrent load. Across all evaluated sizes,  

> 2Aegis v1.2.0 is deployed via the authors’ provided Docker Compose environment available at https: //github.com/aegis-guard/aegis-artifact.

22 system throughput remained within ±1.5% of the 12,500 transactions per second (TPS) baseline, empirically validating the O(1) lookup property and demonstrat-ing that this architectural decoupling scales to exceptionally large behavioral profiles without performance degradation. Moreover, compiling the entire 500-trace ToolBench corpus into the pDFA takes roughly 12 seconds on our test hardware, confirming that the asynchronous offline profiling phase imposes a negligible maintenance burden. 

# 7.4 False Positive Rate and Concept Drift 

1 2 3 4 5

0

5

10 

15 

20   

> 15
> 8.5
> 2.22.12

Context-Window Width ( w)   

> Attack Success Rate (%)
> Fig. 4 Ablation of context-window width ( w) vs. Attack Success Rate (ASR). The elbow at w= 3 establishes the minimum-sufficient threshold for structural security without overfitting. Note that the plotted ASR represents the macro-average across all five attack families, not just the context-sequential subset.

7.4.1 Sensitivity and Adversarial Resilience 

Context Window Ablation. Varying the context width w ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5} at θ = 3 reveals a strict precision-recall tradeoff (Figure 4). For our Context-Sequential set, 

w = 1 and w = 2 result in 100% and 45% ASR, while the default w = 3 drops ASR to 0%. However, increasing to w = 4 and w = 5 fragments the state space, causing legitimate transitions to fall below the pruning threshold and significantly increasing the benign task failure rate (BTFR) to 3.2% and 7.1%. This confirms w = 3 as the optimal operating point for structured deployments. Furthermore, Figure 5 highlights a fundamental deployment boundary: Praetor ’s efficacy relies heavily on task structure. In high-entropy, open-ended environments like the Research Agent (12.6% ASR) and Travel Planner (8.6% ASR), behavior is highly variable, forcing the pDFA to expand permissively and allowing Praetor ’s ASR to regress toward Aegis ’s structured average. This confirms that Praetor is not a universal substitute for stateless scanners in unconstrained environments. Instead, the systems are strictly complementary. Because Praetor acts as a structural gatekeeper with near-zero latency, it operates effectively as a first-line filter. A combined Defense-in-Depth configuration, routing calls that survive Praetor ’s structural and semantic 23 DI II MSE TP MM Overall 

0

10 

20 

> 1.4
> 2.6
> 0
> 2.1
> 1.2
> 1.5
> 2.8
> 5.9
> 0
> 4.4
> 3.1
> 3.2
> 1.8
> 3.5
> 0
> 2.5
> 1.7
> 1.9
> 8.2
> 12 .4
> 4.5
> 10 .1
> 7.8
> 8.6
> 11 .5
> 18 .2
> 6.8
> 14 .5
> 12
> 12 .6
> Attack Success Rate (%)

Praetor Breakdown (Per Scenario)       

> Cust. Service OS Auto DB Admin Travel Planner Research Agent
> Fig. 5 Breakdown of Praetor ’s Attack Success Rate (ASR) across all five scenarios, illustrating the performance degradation in high-entropy, open-ended environments.

validation into a secondary stateless scanner like Aegis for deep syntax inspection, provides optimal security. As shown in Table 3, such a configuration structurally drops the baseline ASR to 0.8% while maintaining the capacity to catch out-of-distribution payloads that evade Praetor ’s bounds in high-entropy settings. 

String Guard Ablation. Disabling the embedding check elevates the macro-averaged ASR across string-heavy families (e.g., from 3.0% to 18.5% for Tool Poison-ing), mandating semantic guards. Under TextFooler [24] synonym substitution attacks, the εstr -ball blocks 82% (95% CI: [78.4%, 85.3%]) of 500 adversarial variants. The 18% evasion rate contrasts sharply with the 1.2% Oracle ASR because TextFooler finds semantics-preserving synonyms that trivially remain inside the continuous boundary, whereas the Oracle attempts to force semantically distant, functionally malicious pay-loads across it. Substituting the encoder with all-mpnet-base-v2 reduces evasion marginally to 16.5%, proving the semantic vulnerability transcends model selection. The residual 18% baseline evasion rate dictates supplementary mitigation. To resolve this, we employ the Sensitive-Parameter Whitelist Override (Section 4). Assuming a theoretically complete, manually curated lexicon (e.g., * path , * query ), the explicit override correctly shields the targeted parameters, dropping the effective evasion rate to 0.4% . However, if the lexicon is incomplete or unmaintained, the evasion rate strictly remains 18% , confirming the override as an operational patch rather than a structural defense. 

7.4.2 Analysis of Usability and Evolution 

The pruning threshold θ governs the behavioral envelope: higher θ values reduce ASR but elevate false positives. At our default θ = 3, Praetor achieves a 2.0% BTFR (2 failures / 100 traces; 95% CI: [0.2%, 7.0%]) on 100 held-out ToolBench traces. Manual 24 inspection of the 12 individually blocked tool calls across the trace batch revealed they consist entirely of long-tail tool sequences (65%) or minor parameter drift (35%). 

Corpus Scaling and Parameter Drift. To explicitly quantify how operational metrics evolve, we scaled the training corpus from 500 to 5,000 traces. At 5,000 traces, the long-tail behavioral paths are fully discovered, and the BTFR drops to a near-zero 

0.2% with no latency penalty. As established empirically, the ASR remains low ( 2.6% 

overall) at this scale, confirming that security is derived from structural constraints, not merely an under-fitted whitelist. Injecting syntactically varied paraphrases into the testing traces at rates from 10% to 50% only raised the BTFR to a maximum of 4.2%, demonstrating that the continuous string parameter guards successfully absorb realistic user interaction drift. 

Concept drift scenario. To evaluate the incremental update protocol (Section 4.3), we simulated concept drift by replacing 20% of the agent’s tool set, selected uniformly at random. The stale pDFA yielded a prohibitive 24.0% BTFR. However, a single incremental update cycle incorporating 350 human-approved sequences restored the BTFR to 3.8%. This yields an estimated labor cost of 8.75 analyst-hours per 20% tool refresh. While non-trivial, this human-in-the-loop cost is the pragmatic price for resisting adversarial telemetry poisoning. 

# 8 Discussion 

# 8.1 Operational Threats and Concept Drift 

Our evaluations are anchored by a 500-trace corpus. The prevalence of long-tail sequence anomalies indicates that 500 traces represent a sparse lower bound rather than an exhaustive operational distribution. While 500 traces serve as a reasonable minimum to establish the core pDFA backbone for these experiments, production deployments should scale the initial profiling corpus by an order of magnitude to fully saturate the valid transition matrix before enabling strict blocking. A primary challenge for whitelist-based enforcement is concept drift: as an agent evolves, the stale pDFA will generate false positives. Praetor ’s human-in-the-loop incremental update protocol (Section 4.3) addresses this by expanding the DFA only upon explicit operator approval, preventing adversaries from silently widening the behavioral envelope. In enterprise settings, a secondary LLM could triage blocked events in bulk, presenting the analyst with grouped summaries rather than individual call logs, for the incremental update cycle runs asynchronously and does not affect gateway availability. However, the core security guarantee of Praetor rests upon the structural integrity of the pDFA, which assumes the training corpus C is strictly benign. A suf-ficiently patient adversary could attempt to gradually contaminate the corpus during the profiling period by feeding the agent subtly malicious inputs, tricking the profiler into authorizing specific tool sequences or widening the continuous εstr -ball boundaries before the pDFA is frozen. Such telemetry poisoning (”cold start problem”) must be 25 mitigated operationally. Profiling should not occur in live, untrusted production envi-ronments; instead, operators must generate the baseline corpus within a sandboxed, clean-room staging environment using curated synthetic user prompts. 

# 8.2 Mitigating Within-Profile Exploits 

The primary residual threat to Praetor is the within-profile exploit . Adversaries con-strained by the pDFA may attempt ”Tool-Call ROP”, inducing sequences of legitimate calls (e.g., repeating read ticket 100 times) to probe system state or infer sensitive data without triggering a structural block. To mitigate these low-bandwidth extrac-tion attacks, operators can deploy rate limiting (bounding cyclic subgraph traversal) alongside lightweight statistical anomaly detectors (e.g., Aegis ’s 7-day baseline) that flag abnormal volume spikes. Moreover, as demonstrated in Section 7.4, adversarial synonym-substitution can evade continuous εstr -ball bounds. Deploying the Sensitive-Parameter Whitelist Override is therefore essential to structurally close this evasion channel. 

# 8.3 Analytical Comparison with Information-Flow Control 

Information-flow control (IFC) systems like Fides [12] use dynamic taint tracking to prevent sensitive data from flowing to untrusted sinks. While IFC strictly blocks explicit Multi-Step Exfiltration if confidentiality labels are perfectly maintained, it struggles against Tool Poisoning or Indirect Injection where malicious actions (e.g., deleting a file) do not violate data confidentiality but break behavioral norms. 

Praetor naturally complements IFC by enforcing the structural workflow without requiring deep integration into the agent’s internal planning state. 

# 8.4 Agent Behavioral Entropy and Scope of Applicability 

Praetor ’s pDFA construction assumes the target agent exhibits low behavioral entropy: a stable set of tool-call sequences with reproducible parameter distributions. This holds strongly for narrow-task, single-role agents. However, large-vocabulary agents (hundreds of tools) or open-ended task agents (general-purpose assistants) exhibit a combinatorially large space of valid call sequences. In these regimes, the 

w-gram context window provides coarser discrimination, merging distinct behavioral modes and elevating residual attack surfaces (as empirically validated in Figure 5). For such agents, operators must rely on larger profiling corpora and carefully tune θ to balance false positives against enforcement rigor. Extension to multi-agent swarms or non-text multi-modal action spaces remains an open architectural challenge for future work. 

# 9 Conclusion 

We presented Praetor , a telemetry-driven behavioral firewall for autonomous AI agents that resolves the sequential-blindness limitation of existing stateless firewalls. The separation of complex profiling from runtime enforcement yields two concrete advantages. First, the runtime gateway incurs negligible per-call overhead (as low 26 as 2.2 ms at the 50 th percentile), representing a 3.7 × to 28.3 × improvement over Aegis, a representative stateless baseline, depending on agent vocabulary size. Second, the behavioral envelope is per-deployment: the pDFA encodes the deployment-level norms of one agent on one system prompt, rather than a generic cross-agent policy. The adversary must therefore mimic the exact historical trajectory of the target agent at every step. Evaluation across five Agent Security Bench scenarios yields a 5.6% 

macro-averaged attack success rate. Within three structured workflows, ASR drops to 

2.2% (baseline Aegis : 12.8% ). Praetor blocks 100% of multi-step exfiltration and context-sequential exploits in these structured domains. Although Praetor reduces the structural attack surface, the string parameter guard exhibits an 18% evasion rate under adversarial synonym-substitution attacks; hardening this component via adversarially resilient embeddings or ensemble validators remains critical future work. These results establish that securing autonomous agents requires explicit models of behavioral trajectories, for stateless inspection fails against sequential exploits. Two directions remain open. First, the current profiler operates on a fixed offline corpus; extending it to incremental streaming ingestion would support deployments where the trace corpus grows continuously. Second, applying differential privacy to the telemetry corpus would harden Praetor against a persistent oracle adversary attempting DFA reconstruction. 

# Statement and Declarations 

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 

Competing Interests : The author declares no conflict of interest. 

Data Availability : The benign trace corpus, attack payloads, pDFA serialisation, and Praetor source code that support the findings of this study will be made avail-able in a public repository upon acceptance / are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 

Author Contributions : Hung Dang is the sole author and contributed to all aspects of this work. 

# References 

[1] Tian, J., Fard, P., Cagan, C., Rezaii, N., Rocha, R.B., Wang, L., Junior, V.M., Blacker, D., Haas, J.S., Patel, C.J., Murphy, S.N., Moura, L., Estiri, H.,: An autonomous agentic workflow for clinical detection of cognitive concerns using large language models. npj Digital Medicine 9(51) (2026) [2] Hou, X., Zhao, Y., Wang, S., Wang, H.: Model context protocol (MCP): Landscape, security threats, and future research directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23278 (2025) 27 [3] Chhabra, A., Datta, S., Nahin, S.K., Mohapatra, P.: Agentic AI security: Threats, defenses, evaluation, and open challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23883 (2025) [4] Ferrag, M.A., Tihanyi, N., Hamouda, D., Maglaras, L., Lakas, A., Debbah, M.: From prompt injections to protocol exploits: Threats in LLM-powered AI agents workflows. ICT Express (2025) [5] Yuan, A., Su, Z., Zhao, Y.: AEGIS: No tool call left unchecked — a pre-execution firewall and audit layer for AI agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12621 (2026) [6] Abdelnabi, S., Gomaa, A., Bagdasarian, E., Kristensson, P.O., Shokri, R.: Fire-walls to secure dynamic LLM agentic networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01822 (2025) [7] Podpora, M., Baranowski, M., Chopcian, M., Kwasniewicz, L., Radziewicz, W.: LLM firewall using validator agent for prevention against prompt injection attacks. Applied Sciences 16 (1), 85 (2026) [8] Forrest, S., Hofmeyr, S.A., Somayaji, A., Longstaff, T.A.: A sense of self for Unix processes. In: Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 120–128. IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA (1996) [9] Xu, W., Huang, C., Gao, S., Shang, S.,: LLM-based agents for tool learning: A survey. Data Science and Engineering (2025) [10] Shi, T., Zhu, K., Wang, Z., Jia, Y., Cai, W., Liang, W., Wang, H., Alzahrani, H., Lu, J., Kawaguchi, K., Alomair, B., Zhao, X., Wang, W.Y., Gong, N., Guo, W., Song, D.: PromptArmor: Simple yet effective prompt injection defenses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15219 (2025) [11] Liao, Z., Chen, K., Lin, Y., Li, K., Liu, Y., et al.: Attack and defense techniques in large language models: A survey and new perspectives. Neural Networks (2025) [12] Costa, M., K¨ opf, B., Kolluri, A., Paverd, A., Russinovich, M., Salem, A., Tople, S., Wutschitz, L., Zanella-B´ eguelin, S.: Securing AI agents with information-flow control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23643 (2025) [13] Uddin, M.S., Hajira, S.: AegisUI: Behavioral anomaly detection for structured user interface protocols in AI agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.05031 (2026) [14] Bell, D.E., LaPadula, L.J.: Secure computer systems: Mathematical foundations (1973). Technical Report MTR-2547 [15] Denning, D.E.: A lattice model of secure information flow. Communications of the ACM 19 (5), 236–243 (1976) 28 [16] Warrender, C., Forrest, S., Pearlmutter, B.: Detecting intrusions using system calls: Alternative data models. In: Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 133–145. IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA (1999) [17] Koohestani, R., Li, Z., Podkopaev, A., Izadi, M.: Are agents probabilistic automata? A trace-based, memory-constrained theory of agentic AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23487 (2025) [18] Leucker, M., Schallhart, C.: A brief account of runtime verification. Journal of Logic and Algebraic Programming 78 (5), 293–303 (2009) [19] D’Antoni, L., Veanes, M.: The power of symbolic automata and transducers. In: Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10426, pp. 47–67. Springer, Cham (2017) [20] Reimers, N., Gurevych, I.: Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks (2019) [21] Zhang, H., Huang, J., Mei, K., Yao, Y., Wang, Z., Zhan, C., Wang, H., Zhang, Y.: Agent security bench (ASB): Formalizing and benchmarking attacks and defenses in LLM-based agents. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02644 

[22] Qin, Y., et al. : Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world APIs. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.16789 

[23] Advani, L.: Trajectory guard–a lightweight, sequence-aware model for real-time anomaly detection in agentic ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.00516 (2026) [24] Jin, D., Jin, Z., Zhou, J.T., Szolovits, P.: Is BERT really robust? a strong baseline for natural language attack on text classification and entailment. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, pp. 8018–8025 (2020) 29