Title: Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.26020v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Apr 2026 00:05:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces 

# Alice Gao 

University of Washington Seattle, WA, USA atgao@cs.washington.edu 

# Weixi Tong 

Purdue University West Lafayette, IN, USA tong172@purdue.edu 

# Rishab Vempati 

Purdue University West Lafayette, IN, USA rvempat@purdue.edu 

# Katharina Reinecke 

University of Washington Seattle, WA, USA reinecke@cs.washington.edu 

# R. Benjamin Shapiro 

University of Washington Seattle, WA, USA rbs@cs.washington.edu 

# Tianyi Zhang 

Purdue University West Lafayette, IN, USA tianyi@purdue.edu 

# Jason Wu 

Purdue University West Lafayette, IN, USA jasonwu@purdue.edu 

## Abstract 

Usability testing with experts and potential users can assess the effectiveness, efficiency, and user satisfaction of graphical user in-terfaces (GUIs) but doing so remains a costly and time-intensive process. Prior work has used computer use agents (CUAs) and other generative agents that can simulate user interactions and prefer-ence, but we show that agents still struggle to provide accurate usability assessments. In this work, we present a novel machine learning method that operationalizes a computational definition of usability to train CUAs to assess GUI usability by i) prioritizing important interaction flows, ii) executing them through human-like interactions, and iii) predicting a learned numerical usability score. We train a computer use agent, uxCUA, with our algorithm on a large-scale dataset of fully interactive user interfaces (UIs) paired with usability labels and human preferences. We show that uxCUA outperforms larger models in accurate usability assessments and produces realistic critiques of both synthetic and real UIs. More broadly, our work aims to build a principled, data-driven foundation for automated usability assessment in HCI. 

## 1 Introduction 

Evaluating the usability of graphical user interfaces (GUIs) is a crucial step in ensuring that users can effectively, efficiently, and satisfactorily navigate software. Traditional usability testing relies on recruiting human participants [ 11 , 13 , 43 , 47 ] or experts [ 27 , 48 ]to test interface functionality through navigating critical interac-tion flows. Feedback from this process can be used to evaluate the candidate interface [ 48 ], select between design alternatives [ 68 ], and guide iterative improvements [ 45 ]. While human-driven us-ability evaluation is an effective solution, it is often forgone before developing new products due to perceived barriers, such as insuffi-cient time, costs, and knowledge [ 33 ]. The ability to conduct initial usability evaluations rapidly and at scale would likely reduce the number of usability issues users encounter by enabling evaluations where they may otherwise be skipped, as well as support imme-diate evaluations of software redesigns as they happen (similar to continuous integration), prior to engaging human evaluators on final or near-final products. With this goal in mind, HCI research has a long tradition of in-vestigating computational methods of assessing interface usability. In The Psychology of Human Computer Interaction , Card, Moran, and Newell first introduced the Model Human Processor, an automated approach to approximating the usability of an interface given es-timates of a user’s cognitive and motor abilities [ 8]. Subsequent research substantially improved the accuracy of these approxima-tions, integrating more complex cognitive mechanisms [ 3] along with more recent machine learning and optimization approaches [52 ]. However, these computational methods face similar challenges as traditional usability testing with human participants, lacking adequate data and resources for developing rigorous automated assessments. Without large-scale data, these previous approaches are limited in their approximations of a human-like usability as-sessments. Large generative models (e.g., large language models or LLMs) offer a potentially promising solution as they are trained on vast amounts of human data. Prior research has simulated human-like interactions through virtual agents [ 53 ], offered design critiques through manually crafted guidelines or instructions [ 12 ], and per-formed cognitive walkthroughs for usability on user interfaces [ 89 ]. Computer use agents (CUAs) which leverage LLMs are also able to navigate through websites and complete tasks [ 28 , 41 ]. Though these models offer the ability to scale the simulation of human behavior on user interfaces, their assessments still lack proper alignment with human behavior and thus the rigor needed for benchmarking and designing comparative user interface (UI) eval-uations [12, 89]. In this paper, we present our work toward data-driven assess-ment of UI usability and development of a novel machine learning objective to train computer use agents (CUAs) to assess GUI usabil-ity. Our training objective provides a computational definition of usability through the creation of uxWeb , the first large-scale dataset of 2,586 fully interactive UIs paired with usability labels (e.g. nu-merical usability scores) and human judgments. Usability labels 

> arXiv:2604.26020v1 [cs.CL] 28 Apr 2026 Gao et al.

were obtained through our synthetic augmentation pipeline that instructed coding agents to inject common usability errors into these websites to modify their source code, to create sets of defect-augmented counterparts. Through our approach we fine-tuned a model, uxCUA , that provides prioritizes important interaction flows and provides accurate usability assessments. While prior systems cannot accurately simulate human usability preferences or perform accurate usability evaluations, we show that with our training objective uxCUA outperforms much larger models in a baseline evaluation with strong proprietary and open source vision language models (VLMs). uxCUA demonstrates a 25% increase in accuracy for generating usability scores over other base-lines with a 41% improvement over the original model. Our results also show that uxCUA produces i) accurate usability assessments in line with known usability labels and human preferences and ii) 

realistic usability critiques of synthetic and real-world sites. To summarize, this paper makes the following contributions: (1) We create uxWeb, a large-scale dataset of fully interac-tive clones of original websites and their defect-augmented counterparts, annotated with usability labels and judgments by designers. (2) We introduce a novel training objective to train uxCUA on our dataset to generate accurate usability ratings of websites after exploring them. (3) We design and conduct a benchmark aimed at measuring the accuracy of agents in accurately assessing UI usability. Our benchmark showed that proprietary VLMs (e.g., GPT-5) often do not assign usability ratings that align with known defects and designer preferences. We also show that uxCUA outperforms much larger proprietary models in usability assessment and can effectively generate critiques for several categories of usability principles. 

## 2 Related Work 

Our research builds on existing work surrounding UI usability evaluation and user simulation by encoding human notions of usability into computational models. We contextualize our work by providing an overview of UI usability evaluation, user simulation, and computer-use agents. 

## 2.1 User Interface Evaluation 

Traditionally, UI evaluation has relied on experts to conduct usabil-ity studies with target users [ 46 ] or heuristic evaluations using a set of guidelines [ 48 ]. While expert-driven evaluations can offer rich and targeted feedback, these approaches are costly and only capture the opinions of a small number of evaluators, remaining difficult to scale. As a result, crowdsourced approaches or “arenas” have been used to incorporate feedback from larger numbers of non-experts [ 42 ] and are widely used to benchmark the design performance of AI models on design tasks [ 6 ]. These approaches enable more rapid feedback, enabling designers to improve UIs for the user experience. Other solutions have focused on modeling human behavior [17, 18, 51] to assess and adapt UIs. Simultaneously, UI evaluation is not limited towards general-ized usability, other types of UI evaluations exist aimed towards improving specific aspects of usability. One particular focus is to de-termine and taxonomize dark patterns [ 10 , 22 ], or UIs intentionally design to mislead users. Others threads of research have focused on detecting design defects [ 76 , 81 ] or accessibility issues [ 14 , 88 ]and even eliciting design preferences that may impact usability for different user groups. Our work extends existing work in user interface evaluation, aiming towards providing automated usability assessment in a data-driven manner. 

## 2.2 User Simulation 

One approach of improving automated UI evaluation is to accurately simulate users of those interfaces. Early work in HCI and cognitive psychology approximated UI usability by combining cognitive and physical measurements (e.g., reaction time and motor speed) with interaction traces to approximate time needed to complete tasks. ACT-R [ 3 ], incorporated richer models of human cognition, such as memory, attention, and learning to more realistically simulate these user-interface interactions. Together with interaction and task models [ 54 ], these user models have been employed to automatically design and evaluate UIs, through approaches collectively known as model-based UI development [ 56 ]. However, these approaches largely relied on hand-crafted models and manually specified rules rather than data-driven learning of user behavior. Since LLMs and other foundation models are trained on large volumes of human-written text and artifacts, researchers hypothe-sized these models to be effective simulations of human responses and interactions [ 25 , 53 , 74 ], also applying these approaches to simulate UI feedback. Recent work has explored prompting LLMs with UI screenshots, personas, and design guidelines to simulate comments from end-users [ 78 ] and experts [ 12 , 89 ]. Since usability evaluation often depends on interface interaction rather than static screenshots, researchers have also developed LLM-based agents and crawlers capable of navigating and operating applications as another method of simulating users. Computer use agents (CUAs) have been used to test the functionality of GUIs and identify bugs through “crawling” [ 19 , 82 ]. Another avenue has been to incorpo-rate these systems into evaluation protocols, such as automated judges [37] or supporting expert-driven evaluation [29, 41, 88]. LLM-based user simulation relies on the assumption that LLMs are accurate models of users, but several works have shown mis-matches in human ratings [ 60 ], responses [ 31 ], and assessments [ 76 ]. This suggests a need to incorporate additional training objectives or additional data to refine off-the-shelf models. Oulasvirta, Jokinen, and Howes theorized that human users behave as bounded ratio-nal agents, and their behavior can be approximated by reinforce-ment learning training objectives [ 52 ]. Subsequent work applied these techniques to learn user simulations for typing [ 63 ], VR selec-tion [ 30 ], and menu navigation [ 44 ]. Others have fine-tuned LLMs using human data such as feedback [ 12 , 76 , 86 ] and interaction traces [ 9] so that their behavior more closely matches that of real users. Our work combines both approaches to fine-tune CUAs for usability testing, with the goal of better aligning their assessment scores and navigation behavior with human users. Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces 

## 2.3 Training Computer-Use Agents 

Foundation models are promising for UI understanding because of their pretraining on large amounts of web data and text gives them strong capabilities for interpreting interfaces and user in-structions. Many approaches for building CUAs prompt foundation models with representations of a target UI and along with the model’s context window and a goal. CUAs can rely on text-only LLMs by converting UIs into intermediate representations (e.g., pseudo DOM) to execute actions [ 9 , 72 ] or they can use multimodal models [ 49 ], where they integrate visual prompting techniques to “ground” their actions. While prompting methods can be effective, they rely heavily on the pre-existing capabilities of the underlying foundation models. To address this issue, later work has explored learning-based approaches that use demonstration trajectories to train or fine-tune CUAs. For example, Mind2Web combined manually annotated web trajectories with fine-tuned action prediction models [ 9 ], while We-bGUM more directly framed web navigation as offline multimodal training over a large corpus of demonstrations [ 15 ]. Other systems such as UI-TARS and OpenCUA trained end-to-end GUI agents on large action-trace datasets and human computer-use demonstra-tions [ 58 , 73 ], and provided automated judges to assess the quality of web development [ 37 ]. Another learning-based approach to im-proving CUA performance is by designing new training objectives or applying reinforcement learning in online environments. Ex-amples include AndroidEnv, which provides an interactive mobile environment for agent training [ 70 ], and more recent methods such as DigiRL, WebRL, and EvoCUA, which improve agents through online interaction, reinforcement learning, or large-scale synthetic rollouts [ 7, 57 , 80 ]. As a result, most CUAs are trained for task completion, e.g., following a user’s natural language command. In our work, we contribute to this line of research by i) construct-ing a novel dataset of interaction rollouts for usability testing, ii) 

developing a new objective for accurate usability scoring, and iii) 

releasing uxCUA as a pretrained checkpoint for future CUA models. 

## 3 Dataset of Interface Usability 

To explore a data-driven approach for usability assessment capabil-ities of machine learning models, we first describe our approach to building uxWeb, a large-scale dataset of 2,586 fully interactive websites paired with usability labels and human judgments. Since a large-scale dataset with the location and severity of real-world us-ability flaws is not readily available, uxWeb is constructed through a combination of synthetic replication of popular websites, principled data augmentation, and human expert ratings. 

## 3.1 Synthetic Websites 

uxWeb consists of sets of synthetically generated clones of websites with usability labels generated from synthetic augmentation and human labeling. We describe the i) website generation process to create plain clones of existing sites, ii) synthetic usability augmen-tations to create a set of defect-augmented counterparts for each plain clone, and iii) our protocol for collecting human ratings. 

3.1.1 Website Generation. We first generated clones of popular websites drawn from Mind2Web, a standardized web agent naviga-tion benchmark [ 9 ] that contains 137 websites, across 5 high-level domains (e.g., shopping, entertainment) and 30 subdomains. Gener-ating standalone “clones” of websites made them easier to deploy, allowed synthetic control of website behavior (e.g., through code edits) and reduced barriers to agent use (e.g., login credentials). To create these clones, we used the Claude Code agent [ 4] config-ured with GLM 4.7 [ 83 ] as the backend endpoint for cost efficiency. At the time of our experiments, Claude Code was the best per-forming coding agent, and GLM 4.7 was the best-performing open source code generation model [ 6]. We provided GLM 4.7 a bare bones React.js template, to avoid requiring the model to gener-ate “boilerplate” configuration code. The coding agent was then prompted to replicate an existing site from Mind2Web based on its name and a description of its functionality. It was also prompted to ensure that the website clone was fully functional, self-contained, and with mocked backend flows that represented the real website as closely as possible. Placeholder assets such as images were retrieved using an online API that was queried with model-generated alt-text annd mock data that was self-generated by the model. The full prompt is provided in Appendix A. Because many of the websites are popular, the coding agent was often able to reconstruct their general interaction flows and common tasks from prior knowledge alone, without requiring screenshots of the reference site. Our goal was not to produce clones that matched the original websites ex-actly in terms functionality or appearance, but instead to generate a diverse distribution of realistic websites for our experiments. Once website generation finished, the model also created a txt file docu-menting all the user flows it had implemented. We used this file for quality control, checking if the first few clones generated had realis-tic and representative user flows implemented before continuing to generate the rest of our dataset. We also used this file when injected usability defects. Each website clone took 5-7 minutes for GLM 4.7 to fully implement. The 879 websites required approximately 102.5 machine-hours to generate, which was distributed over the course of a month. Since synthetic data generation can introduce hallucination, such as the model claiming to have implemented a user flow it did not, or introduce defects due to probabilistic outputs, we cloned each of the 137 Mind2Web sites eight times. We performed two additional rounds of quality checks resulting in a total of 879 plain website clones. The first involved creating a script that would check if the website could be rendered in Playwright, a headless Chrome browser. If the resulting screenshots were were blank, the website was removed from our dataset. The second quality check occurred during our training procedure, which we discuss in §4.3.2. 

3.1.2 Usability Defect Injection. Like their real-world counterparts, our synthetically-cloned websites were not free of usability defects but the type, location, and severity of these defects remains un-known for both real-world sites and our synthetic ones. To support modeling and benchmarking, we developed an approach to inject 

known usability defects into each of our plain clones in a program-matic manner to create sets of defect-augmented versions for each plain synthetic clone. This augmentation process allowed us to mea-sure model performance on a known (but possibly incomplete) list Gao et al. 

of usability flaws. This process also resulted in a relative ranking of website usability between plain and defect-augmented sites, which we later used to calibrate absolute score prediction through an our training objective. To design these usability defects, we reviewed various usability and design guidelines [ 5, 20 , 38 , 46 ]. Ultimately, we chose to adapt Ben Shneiderman’s 8 Golden Rules of Interface Design [ 64 ] for their relevancy to our task and ability to operationalize 1. Below, are the eight types of usability defects inspired by these principles: 

• Consistency : Consistent sequence of actions should be required in similar situations (e.g., identical terminology used in prompts, menus, help screens, consistent layout, capitalization, fonts). 

• Feedback : For every user interaction there should be in-terface feedback. Feedback should be proportional to fre-quency and importance of actions. 

• Dialog : Dialogs should yield closure and should have a clear beginning, middle, and end. 

• Prevention : The interface should be designed so that a user cannot make serious errors; erroneous actions should leave the interface state unchanged. 

• Control : Users should feel as if they are in control of the interface; they should not get unexpected surprises or have tedious data-entry sequences. 

• Reversal : As much as possible, actions should be reversible. 

• Memory : Avoid designs that require users to remember information when moving from one display to another. 

• Hierarchy : Important elements central to the task should be emphasized and easy to find. We automated our usability defect injection in a similar manner to our initial website generation. For each existing plain website clone, we prompted our coding agent to inject code changes to introduce defects that violated one of our usability principles above. We provided GLM 4.7 the codebase for the existing website and the usability principle to violate, then instructed it to introduce changes that would violate the user flows documented in the generation step. The coding agent was instructed to keep all changes contained in the src folder and not introduce changes that would break web-site functionality. We injected usability defects into 388 plain sites. Usability defect injection took 7-10 minutes per principle, which took a total of approximately 284.5 hours to generate our dataset of 1,707 defect-augmented sites. We provide the prompt for usability defect injection in Appendix A. uxWeb was randomly partitioned into training, validation, and testing splits based on unique website name. We reserved one web-site per each unique subdomain (30 total) for our test set. 15% of the remaining websites were used for validation, resulting in 92 unique websites and 15 unique websites for the training and validation splits respectively. In total we had 1,573 clones for training, 199 clones for validation, and 393 clones for testing. 

## 3.2 Designer-Rated Usability 

Our synthetic approach supports the scalable generation of poten-tially large numbers of training examples, which is beneficial for model training. However, the usability defects injected to create our 

> 1These principles also have significant overlap with Nielsen’s Heuristics [46].

defect-augmented sites may not capture usability flaws that were present in the original website clones or reflect human perception of usability, limiting the generalization of models trained on this data. Therefore, we collected an additional split of data labeled by human designers. 

3.2.1 Designer Rating Procedure. To collect designer ratings of these clones, we constructed a model arena . Model arenas are inter-faces commonly used for LLM feedback collection and benchmark-ing [ 6, 40 ], and they require participants to rate multiple candidate outputs for the same input prompt. In our case, we developed a feedback interface where two plain websites without intentionally-introduced defects corresponding to the same source website and prompt were compiled and displayed side-by-side in iframe ele-ments, allowing experts to use the websites while preserving inter-activity. The interface also contained a button that required users to expand the iframe for more detailed inspection and access the website using the full resolution of their browser window. We recruited 17 participants at university level or higher with design background (i.e. university courses or work experience) to partake in our study to rate 30 preference pairs. After navigating the functionality of each site, participants were asked to provide a response that indicated which of the two sites were more usable. Participants were instructed that the sites were clones of existing sites and that placeholder data was used. Participants were recruited through word of mouth or university Slack channels. Our study protocol was determined as exempt by our institution’s IRB. Study details can be found in Appendix C. In total, we collected 510 preference pairs, which spanned 428 unique plain website clones. Using server logs, we found that partic-ipants spent an average of 54.83 2 seconds on each pair and clicked on the iframe window an average of 4.65 times and on an average of 3.05 elements before making their final response. This suggests that participants spent effort in testing website flows before mak-ing their assessments. Nevertheless, when we computed inter-rater agreement for a subset of pairs with multiple labels, we found an agreement rate of 0.308 (Krippendorff’s 𝛼 ). We expected moderate-to-high levels of disagreement, as the websites being compared were all generated from the same model and same prompt, and were therefore more likely to contain similarities. This also mirrors results found by other prior research [ 12 , 42 , 55 , 76 , 77 ], which found high levels of subjectivity in design-related evaluation. 

## 4 Training Approach 

In this section we provide an overview of our novel machine learn-ing objective to train computer use agents to i) prioritize exploration of important UI flows and ii) and accurately predict usability scores that match ground-truth preferences. We also describe how we use this approach to train uxCUA and our agent formulation. 

## 4.1 Problem Formulation 

uxCUA is a CUA designed to perform GUI usability assessment in the same way humans do, through visual perception and clicking. While research has shown that having access to hidden semantic information like the HTML or DOM allows web agents [ 16 , 24 , 71 ]    

> 2We removed outliers based on z-score with 𝑧 >3in cases where the participant may have left the study tab open before coming back to complete a preference rating. Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces

Figure 1: An overview of our CUA architecture for GUI us-ability assessment. At each timestep, the agent receives an observation 𝑜 𝑡 in the form of a screenshot of GUI running in a headless desktop environment, which it uses to update its internal state 𝑠 𝑡 before executing an action 𝑎 𝑡 under its current policy 𝜋 .

to more effectively find information and executing tasks, we chose to formulate uxCUA to operate more generally on any type of GUI and use the same visual reasoning a human would typically un-dergoes (e.g., item search). Based on its initial observation of the input UI, uxCUA predicts interaction flows that are important to overall usability (e.g., room booking for a hotel site) and prioritizes important user flows to check within a given interaction budget (e.g., 50 actions). After the navigation phase, uxCUA reviews its in-teraction session and reasons about the UI’s usability strengths and weaknesses, then produces a numerical value (0-100) representing a usability score. We choose this method as over rubric-based scor-ing due to typical coverage deficiency and noisy evaluations from LLM-based scoring [ 62 , 65 , 67 ], and the fact that no comprehensive usability scale exists. This score was initialized by prompting the model to estimate the probability a user could successfully com-plete the agent’s tested flows given the observed design defects. The score was calibrated and further refined using a training objective that enforces a margin (i.e., minimum difference) between preferred and rejected UIs in our dataset. 

## 4.2 Agent Architecture 

uxCUA is based on a popular open-source CUA agent harness [ 58 ]that captures a stream of screenshots from the user’s desktop, feeds them to the underlying model hosted on a vLLM inference end-point [ 35 ], and uses generated responses to directly control the keyboard and mouse. This allows uxCUA to run on any graphical desktop environment (e.g., operating system) and interact with any GUI regardless of the underlying implementation. The CUA architecture follows the default settings of UI-TARS and maintains several data structures. First, a textual goal, 𝐺 , provided to the agent at the beginning of execution. While most CUAs are trained to perform well-defined tasks (e.g., navigating to a web address), we use a static usability testing prompt (Appendix B) that instructs the model to make its own determination of important interaction flows to test for the purposes of rating usability. At each time step, the harness captures a visual screenshot, or observation 

𝑜 𝑡 , which to update the agent’s internal state 𝑠 𝑡 , which consists of a window of the five most recent visual observations and a JSON-like representation of the session history. 𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑜 𝑡 , and a grounding instruction is used to prompt the uxCUA model to reason about how to make progress towards 𝐺 and describe observations (similar to a “think-aloud” exercise) to produce an executable action 𝑎 𝑡 . Valid actions are defined by the UI-TARS harness and exposed to the model through an initial system prompt. A single step of execution and processing lasts approximately five seconds. The agent stops its navigation when a special “stop” action is generated, e.g., if the model believes it has finished exploration, or if a maximum number of time steps (50) was reached. The final trace reflection and usability scoring is implemented by appending a manually-crafted evaluation prompt (Appendix B) as an additional turn in the session history and generating a response using uxCUA. We provide an overview of this architecture in Figure 1. 

## 4.3 Training Algorithm 

We adopted an approach based on existing policy-based RL training pipelines [ 2, 75 ] to train uxCUA to effectively i) explore UI flows, 

ii) test their functionality, and iii) score their usability. For our experiments, we chose to use EvoCUA 8B [ 80 ] as our base model for fine-tuning because it was the best-performing open source model on the OSWorld benchmark [ 79 ] that could fit on our hardware at the time of our experiments. However, our training approach can be generalized to other open-source CUA models. In this section, we describe the three stages of our training ap-proach: i) rollout generation, ii) reward assignment, and iii) policy update. 

4.3.1 Rollout Generation. In policy-based reinforcement learning approaches, training data is obtained by running the current policy in the environment and collecting rollouts that reflect its present behavior, later adjusted through learning. In our experiments, we configured our agent harness with a base model (i.e., EvoCUA-8B) and generated up to 24 trace rollouts for each website in the training split of uxWeb by repeating its automated usability test protocol. To perform rollout generation, we developed a containerized Apptainer environment that contained i) a headless X display server running at 1080p resolution, ii) an instance of Firefox running in full-screen mode, and iii) our agent harness which controlled a virtual mouse and keyboard. We wrote a script that repeatedly sampled a website from the uxWeb training split at random, which was a React.js application bundle. This bundle was transferred to the container, where the website was staged and hosted at a pre-defined local URL. After successful staging, it was loaded into the browser, and a new usability testing session was started using our CUA harness. The CUA harness was configured to query a vLLM instance running on a compute cluster that served the base model. We configured our harness to log all interactions, model responses, and screenshots to accurately represent the states and actions of the rollout. Figure 2 shows a visualization of a portion of a collected rollout. In total we generated 37,281 traces. Prompts for trace generation and scoring are provided in Appendix B. Gao et al. 

Figure 2: A portion of an interaction trace that the model executes on a site from uxWeb. At the beginning (a) the model is asked to conduct a usability test; (b) the model starts exploration through one if its identified flows; (c) the model concludes its exploration and is prompted to assess the usability based on its interaction history. 

4.3.2 Reward Assignment. After rollout generation, we evaluated and assigned rewards based on the i) quality of the navigation trace and ii) accuracy of the agent’s predicted usability score. Rollouts that are assigned high reward scores are used to amplify effective behaviors within the model’s policy. 

Navigation Quality. The quality of navigation behavior has a large impact in usability assessment, and CUAs can often exhibit behaviors that are not characteristic of human users, such as failure to click graphical targets or “looping” between a small number of screens [ 80 ]. We developed several heuristic measures to validate the navigation quality of rollouts used in training. For each rollout, we computed the following metrics: 

• Same screen ratio: The fraction of transitions with no visual change. Higher values indicate more repetitive be-havior. 

• Same screen after clicks ratio: The fraction of clicks that produced no screen change. Higher values suggest ineffective clicks or that the CUA became stuck. 

• Unique screen ratio: The fraction of unique visited screens. Higher values indicate broader website exploration. 

• Steps: The total number of steps in the interaction trace. Some traces were shorter due to early failure. We filtered out blank screens (possibly due to load failures) before computing the first three metrics as they could artificially reduce these scores. We used perceptual hashing (phash) [ 34 ] with a Ham-ming distance of 4 to compute whether two screens were the same. Perceptual hashing has applications in reverse image search and identifying similar screens [ 1 , 26 , 32 , 59 ]. We then combined these three metrics to compute the navigation quality score, 𝑠 𝑛𝑎𝑣 :        

> 𝑠 𝑛𝑎𝑣 =Unique screen ratio × ( 1−Same screen ratio )(1−Same screen after clicks ratio )(1)

We computed 𝑠 𝑛𝑎𝑣 for unique screens in the rollout that were not separated by scrolling actions, which could trigger false positives in the screen hashing metric. We thresholded this score and rollout length to filter our generated rollouts. Through trial and error we determined that a 𝑠 𝑛𝑎𝑣 of at least 0.07 and a minimum of 30 steps indicated a quality trace. In total we had 7,895 traces that passed this quality check and used to train our model. As an additional filter for website quality, we excluded websites in uxWeb if fewer than 3 of its 24 rollouts passed our heuristics, since we hypothesized that they were likely to contain implementation errors that prevented useful rollouts to be collected. 

Usability Assessment Accuracy. After navigation, uxCUA must ac-curately reflect on its observations, reason about the UI’s strengths and weaknesses, and provide a numerical usability score. Assigning a reward that reflects the accuracy of a rollout’s usability assess-ment is difficult due to the lack of ground truth for both the design reasoning and a usability score. A straightforward but likely incorrect approach is to use a 100 as the target usability score for positive samples (plain websites) and 0 as the target usability score for negative samples (defect-augmented websites). Yet, the absolute quality of websites in our data is not known, e.g., usability defects may exist outside of the ones that were intentionally introduced, which would make 100 the incorrect target score. To address this challenge, we introduce a method for dynam-ically estimating the target usability score of a website based on a model’s initial score predictions for both the website and its defect-augmented counterpart. Our approach, inspired by other contrastive learning objectives for text responses [ 36 , 69 ] and visual design quality [ 77 ], enforces a margin between model-predicted scores of preferred and non-preferred samples (Figure 3). We first estimate the score of the plain website, 𝜇 𝑝 , as the mean predicted usability score across all of its rollouts, and use the same proce-dure to estimate the score of the corresponding defect-augmented website, 𝜇 𝑑 . If the estimated score difference does not satisfy the desired margin, i.e., 𝜇 𝑝 − 𝜇 𝑑 < 𝑚 , we define adjusted target scores such that the positive website is assigned a target of 𝜇 0 + 𝑚  

> 2

and the negative website is assigned a target of 𝜇 0 − 𝑚  

> 2

, which are the values closest to the initial model estimates that satisfy the margin and with 𝜇 0 = 𝜇 𝑝 +𝜇 𝑑  

> 2

. Reward values are then assigned to rollouts for each website based on the proximity of their predicted usability scores to the corresponding target score, such that rollouts with predictions closer to the target receive higher reward. We chose the value of the margin 𝑚 based on manual tuning, and we include it as a hyperparameter in the Appendix. 

4.3.3 Policy Update. Finally, we used our dataset of reward-labeled rollouts to update the CUA’s policy model. For each site in the train-ing split of uxWeb, we selected a single rollout (out of 24) with the highest assigned reward, which led to a total of 631 rollouts. We converted each rollout into multiple training examples using a sliding-window approach, where each training example contained the expected input and output format of the policy network at each Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces 

Figure 3: If the estimated target scores for plain sites ( 𝜇 𝑝 ) and defect-augmented sites ( 𝜇 𝑑 ) satisfy the margin we use their estimated scores. Otherwise, we enforce a margin by shifting their estimated scores. 

timestep in the rollout [ 58 , 80 ]. In total, we generated 27,493 win-dows for fine-tuning our policy. Examples from all websites in the uxWeb training split were aggregated together for training. We used LLaMAFactory [ 87 ], an open source library, to conduct supervised fine-tuning using this rejection-sampled rollouts. We employed 4-bit quantization and LoRA to improve training efficiency. Hyper-parameters were determined through manual experimentation and are provided in Appendix D. Model fine-tuning was conducted on a GPU compute node with 4 H100 GPUs. 

## 5 Evaluation 

We conducted three evaluations to assess our training objective instantiated on our model and measure uxCUA’s performance com-pared with baselines. We first conducted an evaluation that com-pared uxCUA’s usability scoring accuracy with that of existing open-source and proprietary agents. In our second evaluation, we analyzed uxCUA’s critiques on plain and defect-augmented syn-thetic websites, characterizing the types usability issues it identified and verifying if these issues existed. Our third evaluation is a case study, where we provide an informal walkthrough of uxCUA as it conducts a usability test on a real-world site. 

## 5.1 Evaluation 1: Usability Scoring 

We compared the usability scoring performance of uxCUA trained with our objective and several open-source and proprietary models. We evaluated the accuracy of model-predicted scores using labels from the uxWeb dataset, which included both synthetic and human-provided labels. 

5.1.1 Baselines. We used the following multimodal models as base-lines for usability scoring: 

• GPT-5-mini [ 50 ]: OpenAI’s proprietary efficient reasoning model for coding, computer use, and agentic workflows. GPT remains one of the leading choices for proprietary models and at the time of our experiments, this was one of the latest models released. 

• Kimi K2.5 [ 66 ]: Moonshot AI’s open-source 1.1T-parameter reasoning model for coding and computer use. At the time of our experiments, it ranked first among open-source mod-els and second overall on OSWorld [79]. 

• EvoCUA [ 80 ]: Meituan’s open-source CUA model. Its 8B variant (EvoCUA-8B-20260105) was the strongest OSWorld open-source model that could run on consumer hardware at the time of our experiments. 

• uxCUA : Our model, fine-tuned on uxWeb with ground-truth usability labels and human preferences using our training objective. 

5.1.2 Methodology. We first constructed test samples, i.e., prefer-ence pairs, from the test split of uxWeb. From our test split, we randomly selected one plain clone per unique source website (30) and randomly sampled 4 of 8 of the plain clone’s associated defect-augmented variants for a total of 150 sites. In addition, we collected all designer ratings of websites in the test split. In total, the bench-mark consisted of 150 unique uxWeb website implementations and 115 comparison pairs. During our evaluation, all CUAs were configured with the same harness and settings, which standardized their input/output modal-ities, i.e., visual observations of the GUI and keyboard/mouse in-teractions (§4.3.1), and generated chain-of-thought reasoning logs during their interactions. Furthermore, all conditions were run in our container-based GUI execution environment that staged web-sites locally and launched them in a full-screen Firefox browser. One interaction trace was generated for each evaluated site, which was limited to a maximum of 50 timesteps. Next, we applied each model to each site in a preference pair with the model’s prediction computed by taking the higher usability score of the sites in prefer-ence pairs. In cases where the model did not provide a score, we counted that as a vote for the other site. We used AUC (area under precision-recall curve) as our primary metric to assess the degree to which the model’s predicted score discriminated between chosen sites (e.g., plain sites or human-preferred) over rejected ones (e.g., defect-augmented or human-rejected), compared to random chance. AUC accounts for class imbalance in the test set, including the four-to-one ratio of defect-augmented to plain websites. 

5.1.3 Results. Overall, uxCUA outperformed proprietary models, providing accurate usability scores that could discriminate between chosen sites. Our results are shown in Figure 4. Without training, baseline models provide inaccurate usability assessments on UIs with known usability issues. We observe how baseline models provide inaccurate usability assessments on our defect-augmented sites, with GPT-5-mini and EvoCUA providing assessments worse than chance, with an AUC of 0.436 and 0.381 respectively. Though Kimi K2.5 is somewhat better at providing higher usability scores for plain sites over defect-augmented vari-ants (AUC = 0.521), it is only slightly better than chance. In contrast, uxCUA shows much better performance in correctly providing us-ability assessments to sites with known defects with an AUC of 0.632. On average, it provides a 44% increase in AUC with a notably substantial improvements to its base model, EvoCUA (65.9%). Gao et al. 

Figure 4: Model performance on AUC of test splits on uxWeb for ground-truth labels and human preferences. Applying our training approach on a base model (EvoCUA) led to sig-nificant improvements (uxCUA) with a 41% increase in AUC. Our trained model is better at providing accurate usability scores for sites with and without known defects and for hu-man preferences. 

Additionally, uxCUA achieves a higher AUC (0.607) on human preference labels compared to other baseline models. Similar to before, the AUC for other models (GPT-5-mini: 0.592, Kimi K2.5: 0.588, EvoCUA: 0.522) remains low. Additionally, their agreement rate with what humans label as more usable UIs suggests results comparable to random guessing. As described in §3.2, the original agreement rate between designers was low ( 𝛼 =0.308) so large im-provements may be difficult. More notably, uxCUA shows large improvements over EvoCUA (0.435) for the agreement with de-signers. uxCUA also achieves the highest AUC score (0.607) of all models, suggesting that training on human preferences pairs benefits the model. Overall, our results suggest that our training paradigm with our data is an effective method for learning usability scoring, providing uxCUA the ability to both form accurate usability assessments on sites with known defects and provide assessments aligned with human preferences. 

## 5.2 Evaluation 2: Usability Critique Analysis 

Our first evaluation focused on assessing models’ ability to accu-rately predict scores in comparison to human-scored ground-truth labels and preference pairs. In this second evaluation, we examine the usability issues (e.g., critiques) identified by uxCUA before it provides its final usability assessment on both plain sites and their defect-augmented counterparts. We first extracted the list of usability issues the uxCUA provided during its interaction trace just before it provided its usability as-sessment on the 150 benchmark sites from the previous section. We used GPT-4o-mini to classify these issues into one of the eight types of usability defects we injected in §3.1.2. To validate the usability critiques the uxCUA generated, two authors each examined 5 plain sites and a random sample of their defect-augmented counterparts along with the full list of usability critiques for each site. The au-thors then manually inspected each site, verifying the existence of uxCUA’s reported usability issue. In total, we manually inspected 47 sites and created a list of 371 usability issues. Overall we found that uxCUA’s precision for reporting existing issues was 69.8%. The model tended to slightly misreport issues on plain clones (60.8%) while more accurately reasoning and providing critiques on defect-augmented sites (71.9%). We also observed that uxCUA was most accurate in its assessment of usability issues related to feedback, control, and consistency for defect-augmented sites while most accurate in control issues for plain sites. This aligns with the types of issues uxCUA most frequently reported (Figures 1) and may also be due to the fact during target selection and training, these types of defect-augmented sites were most frequently seen. Overall, these results suggest that uxCUA can not only provide accurate usability assessments for sites with known defects but also generates reasonable usability critiques. We provide the full breakdown of categorized issues in Appendix E. 

Table 1: Through a subset of manually inspected issues, we observe that uxCUA provides realistic and existing usability issues for defect-augmented (D.A.) sites, as indicated by its precision. The left side of the table provides the true positive (TP) and false positive (FP) counts for reported issues.                                                         

> Plain D.A. Precision Category TP FP TP FP Plain D.A. Consistency 119150% 90% Feedback 18 19 95 52 49% 65% Dialog 01100% 100% Prevention 3025 8100% 76% Control 14 344 22 82% 67% Reversal 0010–100% Memory 0021–67% Hierarchy 6340 167% 98%

## 5.3 Evaluation 3: A Walkthrough with uxCUA 

In this section, we demonstrate that with our training approach, uxCUA can i) conduct a usability test on a real-world site from our test set, ii) prioritize important interaction flows to explore usability, and iii) providing a usability score grounded in its inter-action history. We selected craigslist.org and provide an example walkthrough 3 as uxCUA navigates the website. As the site’s issues remain unknown, we highlight areas where uxCUA successfully and unsuccessfully explores the website and provide its final usabil-ity assessment as an example (Figure 5). uxCUA begins when we instruct it to conduct a usability test on craigslist.org. The agent first waits for the page to load before beginning z1 ):                                

> Agent :I'll start by identifying the most important user goals for this site . Craigslist is primarily used for posting and searching for classified ads , so I'll need to test these flows .

Observing the list of US states and cities, the agent decides to explore local listings in New York City ( z2 ), reasoning that is a major city that will enable it to better test the site’s features. After navigating to New York City Craigslist page, the agent decides 

> 3For the purpose of this walkthrough we provide abridged versions of turns. Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces

Figure 5: An abridged interaction trace as uxCUA conducts a usability test on craigslist.org. In this example, the agent chooses to explore flows related to searching for items on sale. 

to test the functionality of the search box with a common item it believes to be most useful to users, a phone ( z3 ).                                      

> Agent :Isee the page has loaded with various iPhone - related items . The search results are for " iphone " but the category filter on the left is set to " cell phones ." I'll adjust the filter to " electronics " to refine results and test functionality .

Once the agent successfully refines its search ( z4 ), it decides to test flows for browsing and examining product details. To do so, uxCUA then clicks on a result for an iPhone, spending a few turns clicking through the image gallery( z5 , z6 ). Once it finishes testing the gallery function, it progresses to see if it can view addi-tional details about the phone or seller’s contact information. After verifying that the seller’s contact information can be viewed ( z7 ), it continues its usability test and attempts to navigate back to the main electronics listings page. Here( z8 ) the agent decides to click on the prev button at top of the screen to return to the main listing page, but ends up on a different iPhone listing instead. This is likely due to the fact that the way to navigate back to Craigslist’s search results page is actually through the uparrow ( ↑) between the prev and next hyperlinks and not the hyperlinks themselves. At this point the agent, unable to navigate back to the listings page, decides to continue its current interaction flow by exploring more iPhone listings and examining each iPhone listing in detail to test the functionality of details views before it reaches the maximum number of steps ( z9 , z10 ). At the end, the agent provides its final usability assessment:                                                            

> Agent :Isee issues with : -Navigation :Repeatedly click on " prev " and " next " buttons to navigate content suggests inconsistent or unreliable navigation , indicating potential issues . -Confusing Flows :Interaction history shows the assisstant needs to scroll multiple times to view content , suggesting the layout or content organization may be unintuitive . -Failed Page Loads :There were no page load failures , which is good . Based on the these issues , the website usability score is 65 .

Overall, we observe that uxCUA is able to successfully navigate and identify key flows it should test on Craigslist, knowing how to search for items, identifying inconsistencies, and to explore page details. Though it occasionally gets stuck, the agent still provides as grounded assessment based on its interaction history. 

## 6 Discussion 

We introduced a novel training objective to train CUAs to assess GUI usability and show that through our training approach our model, uxCUA, outperforms baselines in providing accurate us-ability scores and produces realistic critiques of synthetic and real-world UIs. We next discuss key results and broader implications. 

## 6.1 Computational Definition of Usability 

A central goal of this work is to define usability assessment in a form that can be learned computationally. Usability depends on multiple factors, including aesthetics, functionality, and how easily users can discover important functionality. The UI perception and navigation capabilities of the underlying foundation model are important, but insufficient on their own. For example, our experiments found that models with stronger OSWorld navigation performance could navigate sites but lacked grounded usability assessments, frequently assigning websites with known defects usability scores akin to chance. One way to operationalize usability is to prompt models with design guidelines [ 89 ] or expert-written critiques [ 12 ]. However, these approaches often produce invalid or only partially valid cri-tiques, likely because positive examples alone do not discourage hallucinations and a model’s retrieved examples may come from mismatched contexts. Another approach is to supervise the evalua-tion process itself by training on expert traces. In practice, this is difficult: different evaluation methods can produce different find-ings [ 21 ]. Additionally traces are often noisy, and there is no single canonical path to a correct usability judgment. Such data is also hard to augment synthetically. We therefore focused on outcome supervision rather than direct process supervision [ 39 , 61 ]. Outcome labels are easier to generate at scale and less costly for humans to provide. Prior work has done this for static screenshots [ 76 ], but interactive usability assessment Gao et al. 

makes process and outcome tightly coupled: incorrect judgments may result from either poor exploration or poor reasoning. uxCUA is an initial step toward encoding an HCI evaluation procedure into a model, and we hope similar approaches can help formalize and learn other HCI methods. 

## 6.2 From User to Designer-Centered Simulation 

Our approach builds on prior HCI work on user simulation, but targets a different role: centering designers rather than end users. In a standard usability study, researchers provide participants with tasks [ 46 ], so simulating users means modeling how they respond to predefined stimuli or goals [ 3, 8, 84 ]. In contrast, our training objective designed uxCUA to identify and prioritize important in-teraction flows and identify defects in those, providing insights that can guide designers in their work. Our approach also extends prior systems that simulate expert critique in heuristic evaluation [ 12 , 89 ]. The critiques simulated by these systems were only considered helpful 30% of the time and were not always helpful whereas our second evaluation demon-strates that uxCUA is more precise in producing valid usability critiques. Additionally, our training objective also provides rela-tive usability scores. Beyond generating critiques, designers must weigh severity and tradeoffs, especially when comparing alter-natives. Treating the numerical usability score prediction as an important part of training the model to make judgments provides designers an interpretable way of assessing usability issues and determining their severity. As with prior user-simulation work [ 30 ], we hope releasing our dataset and models will support more reproducible HCI evaluation and provide a useful first-pass assessor when participant recruit-ment is difficult or when designers want rapid feedback during their design processes. Beyond user simulation, we believe designer simulation could enable additional possibilities for HCI researchers and practitioners such as targeted testing, idea generation, and feedback synthesis. More broadly, whereas user simulation has tra-ditionally supported designers as a tool, we hope this work takes an initial step toward systems that can collaborate in the design process. 

## 6.3 Limitations & Future Work 

While we show uxCUA outperforms other baselines in our experi-mental data, we see several avenues for improvement. 

Technical Limitations. uxCUA is constrained by both compute limits and current CUA capabilities. Crawls were capped at 50 steps, likely preventing complete coverage of a website. This was due to practical constraints and by design: our training objective emphasized prioritizing important tasks rather than exhaustive exploration. Accordingly, unlike a traditional crawler, uxCUA was not intended to achieve full coverage in this initial work. Addition-ally, uxCUA is slow, requiring at least five second per step when accounting for the agent’s internal timing and model inference on our hardware. Due to this delay, uxCUA sometimes makes errors that humans typically would not (in §5.3), such as missing click targets and misclassifying them as usability issues. However, ux-CUA’s large improvements over its original model and performance compared to proprietary models still suggest that our training ob-jective can be applied to more powerful models and improve their usability assessments. With less computational limits, future work can also explore applying our training approach with video streams to improve model usability assessment performance. The model was trained primarily on fixed-resolution websites, due to the available synthetic data and to the training environment of the base model [ 80 ]. We expect this approach to transfer to similar 2D WIMP interfaces, but likely less well to mobile or XR settings. Finally, our website evaluations did not include strong guardrails against high-impact actions, such as making purchases or deleting data. Prior work highlights the importance of accounting for the consequences of risky or irreversible UI actions [ 85 ], which was one reason we limited evaluation on real-world sites. 

Generalizability. uxCUA was trained and primarily evaluated on synthetic websites, limiting its generalizability. We used synthetic sites because they allow controlled manipulation of usability char-acteristics, reproducible evaluation, and terms-of-service-compliant data collection without requiring user accounts or payment infor-mation. However, they are less polished than real websites and may not capture the full range of real-world usability issues. Prior work has shown that CUAs can be influenced by dark patterns, suggest-ing that some interfaces may be harder for both our model and humans to evaluate [ 23 ]. Although our walkthrough provides some evidence that uxCUA can operate on real websites, our findings may not extend to all intended use cases, such as other other GUI types (e.g., native desktop or mobile apps) or intermediate stages of a designer’s workflow. Still, the strong gains over EvoCUA-8B on both splits of the synthetic dataset suggest that our architecture and training approach are effective when suitable data is available, and may transfer to other domains with sufficient domain-specific data. 

Contextualized Evaluation. Finally, we note limitations of our evaluation and directions for future work. We focused on outcome decision and critique accuracy, but these do not fully capture the process by which uxCUA reaches its judgments. Even when the model matches human preferences, it is unclear whether this is because it explores the same parts of the interface or relies on similarly meaningful evidence. Although our coding procedure in §5.2 provides some insight, trace quality remains difficult to measure in a principled way. Different use cases will also require different capabilities and evaluation criteria. Our approach focused on training CUAs to provide accurate usability scores as a relative assessment for a site’s usability, in other scenarios such as designer judging, direct designer agreement may be more appropriate. Similarly, in other contexts, designers may value actionable feedback and control over the tasks, instructions, and context provided to the model. Practitioners using uxCUA in model training may need interpretable and calibrated scores. In end-user or generative UI settings, the model may also need to adapt to individual preferences and accessibility needs. We hope our released dataset and models provide a foundation for these more targeted applications and evaluations. Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces 

## 7 Conclusion 

We presented a novel training objective to train CUAs to assess GUI usability by prioritizing important interaction flows and predict calibrating usability scores. We used it to fine-tune our model, ux-CUA. To support this goal, we created uxWeb, a large-scale dataset of interactive websites annotated with both synthetic defect-based usability labels and human judgments. Across three evaluations, uxCUA outperformed substantially larger proprietary and open models on usability scoring and produced realistic assessments of both synthetic and real-world interfaces. These findings suggest that current off-the-shelf agents are not (yet) sufficient for rigorous usability assessment, but that usability assessment can be learned when paired with appropriate data and objectives. More broadly, we hope this work provides a foundation for scalable, reproducible, and human-aligned usability evaluation in HCI, and that releasing our data and models will support future research on automated design evaluation, benchmarking, and interactive AI systems. 

## Acknowledgments 

This work used Anvil at Purdue University through allocation CIS260289 from the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services & Support (ACCESS) program and was funded in part by NSF grant ITE-2333736. 

## References 

[1] Pieter Agten, Wouter Joosen, Frank Piessens, and Nick Nikiforakis. 2015. Seven months’ worth of mistakes: A longitudinal study of typosquatting abuse. In 

Proceedings of the 22nd Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS 2015) . Internet Society. [2] Arash Ahmadian, Chris Cremer, Matthias Gallé, Marzieh Fadaee, Julia Kreutzer, Olivier Pietquin, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. 2024. Back to Basics: Revisiting REINFORCE Style Optimization for Learning from Human Feedback in LLMs. arXiv:2402.14740 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14740 [3] John R. Anderson and Christian Lebiere. 1998. The Atomic Components of Thought .Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ. [4] Anthropic. 2026. Claude Code: Overview (Documentation). https://docs. anthropic.com/en/docs/agents-and-tools/claude-code/overview. Accessed 2026-02-06. [5] Apple. 2023. Human Interface Guidelines. https://developer.apple.com/design/ human-interface-guidelines [6] Arcada Labs. 2026. DesignArena by Arcada Labs. https://www.designarena.ai/. Accessed 2026-02-06. [7] Hao Bai, Yifei Zhou, Mert Cemri, Jiayi Pan, Alane Suhr, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. 2024. DigiRL: Training In-The-Wild Device-Control Agents with Au-tonomous Reinforcement Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (NeurIPS 2024) . doi:10.52202/079017-0397 [8] Stuartk Card, THOMASP MORAN, and Allen Newell. 1986. The model human processor- An engineering model of human performance. Handbook of perception and human performance. 2, 45–1 (1986), 1–35. [9] Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Samuel Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. 2023. Mind2Web: Towards a Gener-alist Agent for the Web. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems . https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/ 5950bf290a1570ea401bf98882128160-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf [10] Linda Di Geronimo, Larissa Braz, Enrico Fregnan, Fabio Palomba, and Alberto Bacchelli. 2020. UI Dark Patterns and Where to Find Them: A Study on Mobile Applications and User Perception. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3313831. 3376600 [11] Alan Dix. 2004. Human-computer interaction . Vol. 1. Pearson Education. [12] Peitong Duan, Chin-Yi Cheng, Gang Li, Bjoern Hartmann, and Yang Li. 2024. UICrit: Enhancing Automated Design Evaluation with a UI Critique Dataset. In 

Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Pittsburgh, PA, USA) (UIST ’24) . Association for Computing Machin-ery, New York, NY, USA, Article 46, 17 pages. doi:10.1145/3654777.3676381 [13] Leah Findlater and Joanna McGrenere. 2007. Evaluating reduced-functionality interfaces according to feature findability and awareness. In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction . Springer, 592–605. [14] Raymond Fok, Mingyuan Zhong, Anne Spencer Ross, James Fogarty, and Ja-cob O. Wobbrock. 2022. A Large-Scale Longitudinal Analysis of Missing Label Accessibility Failures in Android Apps. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22) . As-sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 461, 16 pages. doi:10.1145/3491102.3502143 [15] Hiroki Furuta, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Yutaka Matsuo, Aleksandra Faust, Shixiang Shane Gu, and Izzeddin Gur. 2023. Multimodal Web Navigation with Instruction-Finetuned Foundation Models. arXiv:2305.11854 [cs.AI] [16] Hiroki Furuta, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Yutaka Matsuo, Aleksandra Faust, Shixiang Shane Gu, and Izzeddin Gur. 2024. Multimodal Web Navigation with Instruction-Finetuned Foundation Models. arXiv:2305.11854 [cs.LG] https:// arxiv.org/abs/2305.11854 [17] Krzysztof Gajos and Daniel S Weld. 2004. SUPPLE: automatically generating user interfaces. In Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces . 93–100. [18] Krzysztof Gajos and Daniel S Weld. 2005. Preference elicitation for interface optimization. In Proceedings of the 18th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . 173–182. [19] Yifei Gao, Jiang Wu, Xiaoyi Chen, Yifan Yang, Zhe Cui, Tianyi Ma, Jiaming Zhang, and Jitao Sang. 2026. GUITester: Enabling GUI Agents for Exploratory Defect Discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.04500 (2026). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2601.04500 [20] Kelley Gordon. 2020. 5 Principles of Visual Design in UX. https://www.nngroup. com/articles/principles-visual-design/ [21] Wayne D. Gray and Marilyn C. Salzman. 1998. Damaged Merchandise? A Review of Experiments That Compare Usability Evaluation Methods. Human–Computer Interaction 13, 3 (1998), 203–261. doi:10.1207/S15327051HCI1303_2 [22] Johanna Gunawan, Amogh Pradeep, David Choffnes, Woodrow Hartzog, and Christo Wilson. 2021. A Comparative Study of Dark Patterns Across Web and Mobile Modalities. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW2, Article 377 (Oct. 2021), 29 pages. doi:10.1145/3479521 [23] Longjie Guo, Chenjie Yuan, Mingyuan Zhong, Robert Wolfe, Ruican Zhong, Yue Xu, Bingbing Wen, Hua Shen, Lucy Lu Wang, and Alexis Hiniker. 2026. SusBench: An Online Benchmark for Evaluating Dark Pattern Susceptibility of Computer-Use Agents. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1917–1937. doi:10.1145/3742413.3789111 [24] Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo, Douglas Eck, and Aleksandra Faust. 2024. A Real-World WebAgent with Planning, Long Context Understanding, and Program Synthesis. arXiv:2307.12856 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.12856 [25] Perttu Hämäläinen, Mikke Tavast, and Anton Kunnari. 2023. Evaluating Large Language Models in Generating Synthetic HCI Research Data: a Case Study. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3544548. 3580688 [26] Qingying Hao, Licheng Luo, Steve T.K. Jan, and Gang Wang. 2021. It’s Not What It Looks Like: Manipulating Perceptual Hashing based Applications. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (Virtual Event, Republic of Korea) (CCS ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 69–85. doi:10.1145/3460120.3484559 [27] Aurora Harley. 2018. UX Expert Reviews. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ux-expert-reviews/. [28] Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan, and Dong Yu. 2024. WebVoyager: Building an End-to-End Web Agent with Large Multimodal Models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) .Association for Computational Linguistics, 6314–6330. https://aclanthology.org/ 2024.acl-long.371/ [29] Steffen Holter, Eunyee Koh, Mustafa Doga Dogan, and Gromit Yeuk-Yin Chan. 2026. UXCascade: Scalable Usability Testing with Simulated User Agents. arXiv:2601.15777 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.15777 [30] Aleksi Ikkala, Florian Fischer, Markus Klar, Miroslav Bachinski, Arthur Fleig, Andrew Howes, Perttu Hämäläinen, Jörg Müller, Roderick Murray-Smith, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2022. Breathing Life Into Biomechanical User Models. In 

Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Bend, OR, USA) (UIST ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3526113.3545689 [31] Shivani Kapania, William Agnew, Motahhare Eslami, Hoda Heidari, and Sarah E. Fox. 2025. Simulacrum of Stories: Examining Large Language Models as Qualita-tive Research Participants. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713220 Honorable Mention. [32] Panagiotis Kintis, Najmeh Miramirkhani, Charles Lever, Yizheng Chen, Rosa Romero-Gómez, Nikolaos Pitropakis, Nick Nikiforakis, and Manos Antonakakis. 2017. Hiding in plain sight: A longitudinal study of combosquatting abuse. In 

Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Gao et al. 

Security . 569–586. [33] Laura Klein. 2025. Why Organizations Don’t Do User Research and How to Change That . Nielsen Norman Group. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/why-organizations-dont-do-user-research/ [34] Evan Klinger and David Starkweather. 2021. pHash: The open source perceptual hash library. https://www.phash.org/docs/ [35] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAtten-tion. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles .[36] Nathan Lambert. 2026. The RLHF Book: Reinforcement Learning from Hu-man Feedback, Alignment, and Post-Training LLMs . Manning Publications. https://www.manning.com/books/the-rlhf-book Manning Early Access Pro-gram (MEAP); publication estimated Summer 2026; last updated January 2026. [37] Chunyang Li, Yilun Zheng, Xinting Huang, Tianqing Fang, Jiahao Xu, Lihui Chen, Yangqiu Song, and Han Hu. 2026. WebDevJudge: Evaluating (M)LLMs as Critiques for Web Development Quality. arXiv:2510.18560 [cs.SE] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2510.18560 [38] William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, and Jill Butler. 2010. Universal principles of design, revised and updated: 125 ways to enhance usability, influence perception, increase appeal, make better design decisions, and teach through design . Rockport Pub. [39] Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2023. Let’s Verify Step by Step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050 (2023). arXiv:2305.20050 [cs.LG] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2305.20050 [40] LMArena Team. 2025. WebDev Arena: A Live LLM Leaderboard for Web App Development. https://lmarena.ai/blog/webdev-arena/. Published 2025-03-09; contributors: Aryan Vichare, Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Wei-Lin Chiang, Kelly Tang, Luca Manolache; accessed 2026-02-06. [41] Yuxuan Lu, Bingsheng Yao, Hansu Gu, Jing Huang, Zheshen Jessie Wang, Yang Li, Jiri Gesi, Qi He, Toby Jia-Jun Li, and Dakuo Wang. 2025. UXAgent: An LLM Agent-Based Usability Testing Framework for Web Design. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 545, 12 pages. doi:10.1145/3706599.3719729 [42] Kurt Luther, Jari-Lee Tolentino, Wei Wu, Amy Pavel, Brian P. Bailey, Maneesh Agrawala, Björn Hartmann, and Steven P. Dow. 2015. Structuring, Aggregating, and Evaluating Crowdsourced Design Critique. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing (Van-couver, BC, Canada) (CSCW ’15) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 473–485. doi:10.1145/2675133.2675283 [43] Thomas Mahatody, Mouldi Sagar, and Christophe Kolski. 2010. State of the art on the cognitive walkthrough method, its variants and evolutions. Intl. Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 26, 8 (2010), 741–785. [44] Hee Seung Moon, Antti Oulasvirta, and Byungjoo Lee. 2023. Amortized Inference with User Simulations. In CHI 2023 - Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581439 [45] Jakob Nielsen. 1994. Usability engineering . Morgan Kaufmann. [46] Jakob Nielsen. 2012. Usability 101: Introduction to Usability. https://www. nngroup.com/articles/usability-101-introduction-to-usability/. [47] Jakob Nielsen and Thomas K. Landauer. 1993. A mathematical model of the finding of usability problems. In Proceedings of the INTERACT ’93 and CHI ’93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Amsterdam, The Nether-lands) (CHI ’93) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 206–213. doi:10.1145/169059.169166 [48] Jakob Nielsen and Rolf Molich. 1990. Heuristic evaluation of user interfaces. In 

Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Seattle, Washington, USA) (CHI ’90) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 249–256. doi:10.1145/97243.97281 [49] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4V(ision) System Card. https://cdn.openai.com/papers/ GPTV_System_Card.pdf. OpenAI system card. [50] OpenAI. 2025. Introducing GPT-5. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5/ [51] Antti Oulasvirta, Samuli De Pascale, Janin Koch, Thomas Langerak, Jussi Joki-nen, Kashyap Todi, Markku Laine, Manoj Kristhombuge, Yuxi Zhu, Aliaksei Miniukovich, et al . 2018. Aalto interface metrics (AIM) a service and codebase for computational GUI evaluation. In Adjunct proceedings of the 31st annual ACM symposium on user interface software and technology . 16–19. [52] Antti Oulasvirta, Jussi PP Jokinen, and Andrew Howes. 2022. Computational rationality as a theory of interaction. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–14. [53] Joon Sung Park, Lindsay Popowski, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2022. Social Simulacra: Creating Populated Prototypes for Social Computing Systems. arXiv:2208.04024 [cs.HC] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2208.04024 [54] Fabio Paternò, Cristiano Mancini, and Silvia Meniconi. 1997. ConcurTaskTrees: A Diagrammatic Notation for Specifying Task Models. In Human-Computer Interaction INTERACT ’97 , Steve Howard, Judy Hammond, and Gitte Lindgaard (Eds.). Springer, Boston, MA, 362–369. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-35175-9_58 [55] Yi-Hao Peng, Jeffrey P. Bigham, and Jason Wu. 2025. DesignPref: Capturing Personal Preferences in Visual Design Generation. arXiv:2511.20513 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.20513 [56] Angel R. Puerta. 1997. A Model-Based Interface Development Environment. 

IEEE Software 14, 4 (1997), 40–47. [57] Zehan Qi, Xiao Liu, Iat Long Iong, Hanyu Lai, Xueqiao Sun, Jiadai Sun, Xinyue Yang, Yu Yang, Shuntian Yao, Wei Xu, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. 2025. WebRL: Training LLM Web Agents via Self-Evolving Online Curriculum Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .[58] Yujia Qin, Yining Ye, Junjie Fang, Haoming Wang, Shihao Liang, Shizuo Tian, Junda Zhang, Jiahao Li, Yunxin Li, Shijue Huang, Wanjun Zhong, Kuanye Li, Jiale Yang, Yu Miao, Woyu Lin, Longxiang Liu, Xu Jiang, Qianli Ma, Jingyu Li, Xiaojun Xiao, Kai Cai, Chuang Li, Yaowei Zheng, Chaolin Jin, Chen Li, Xiao Zhou, Minchao Wang, Haoli Chen, Zhaojian Li, Haihua Yang, Haifeng Liu, Feng Lin, Tao Peng, Xin Liu, and Guang Shi. 2025. UI-TARS: Pioneering Automated GUI Interaction with Native Agents. arXiv:2501.12326 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/ abs/2501.12326 [59] Jathushan Rajasegaran, Naveen Karunanayake, Ashanie Gunathillake, Suranga Seneviratne, and Guillaume Jourjon. 2019. A multi-modal neural embeddings ap-proach for detecting mobile counterfeit apps. In The World Wide Web Conference .3165–3171. [60] Shreya Shankar, JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Björn Hartmann, Aditya Parameswaran, and Ian Arawjo. 2024. Who validates the validators? aligning llm-assisted evalu-ation of llm outputs with human preferences. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . 1–14. [61] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the Limits of Mathematical Reasoning in Open Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 (2024). arXiv:2402.03300 [cs.CL] doi:10.48550/arXiv. 2402.03300 [62] William F. Shen, Xinchi Qiu, Chenxi Whitehouse, Lisa Alazraki, Shashwat Goel, Francesco Barbieri, Timon Willi, Akhil Mathur, and Ilias Leontiadis. 2026. Re-thinking Rubric Generation for Improving LLM Judge and Reward Modeling for Open-ended Tasks. arXiv:2602.05125 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.05125 [63] Danqing Shi, Yujun Zhu, Jussi P. P. Jokinen, Aditya Acharya, Aini Putkonen, Shumin Zhai, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2024. CRTypist: Simulating Touchscreen Typing Behavior via Computational Rationality. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642918 [64] Ben Shneiderman. 2010. Designing the user interface: strategies for effective human-computer interaction . Pearson Education India. [65] Sijun Tan, Siyuan Zhuang, Kyle Montgomery, William Y Tang, Alejandro Cuadron, Chenguang Wang, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica. 2024. Judgebench: A benchmark for evaluating llm-based judges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12784 

(2024). [66] Kimi Team. 2026. Kimi K2.5: Visual Agentic Intelligence. arXiv:2602.02276 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.02276 [67] Aman Singh Thakur, Kartik Choudhary, Venkat Srinik Ramayapally, Sankaran Vaidyanathan, and Dieuwke Hupkes. 2025. Judging the judges: Evaluating alignment and vulnerabilities in llms-as-judges. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Generation, Evaluation and Metrics (GEM 2). 404–430. [68] Maryam Tohidi, William Buxton, Ronald Baecker, and Abigail Sellen. 2006. Get-ting the right design and the design right. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems . 1243–1252. [69] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yas-mine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhos-ale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. (2023). arXiv:2307.09288 [cs.CL] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288 [70] Daniel Toyama, Philippe Hamel, Anita Gergely, Gheorghe Comanici, Amelia Glaese, Zafarali Ahmed, Tyler Jackson, Shibl Mourad, and Doina Pre-cup. 2021. AndroidEnv: A Reinforcement Learning Platform for Android. arXiv:2105.13231 [cs.LG] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2105.13231 [71] Browser Use. 2026. Browser Use: The AI browser agent. https://browser-use.com Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces 

[72] Bryan Wang, Gang Li, and Yang Li. 2023. Enabling conversational interaction with mobile ui using large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–17. [73] Xinyuan Wang, Bowen Wang, Dunjie Lu, Junlin Yang, Tianbao Xie, Junli Wang, Jiaqi Deng, Xiaole Guo, Yiheng Xu, Chen Henry Wu, et al . 2025. Opencua: Open foundations for computer-use agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09123 (2025). [74] Zichao Wang and Alexa Siu. 2026. Interview-Informed Generative Agents for Product Discovery: A Validation Study. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM. Honorable Mention. [75] Ronald J Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning 8, 3 (1992), 229–256. [76] Jason Wu, Yi-Hao Peng, Amanda Li, Amanda Swearngin, Jeffrey P. Bigham, and Jeffrey Nichols. 2024. UIClip: A Data-driven Model for Assessing User Interface Design. arXiv:2404.12500 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.12500 [77] Jason Wu, Amanda Swearngin, Arun Krishna Vajjala, Alan Leung, Jeffrey Nichols, and Titus Barik. 2025. Improving User Interface Generation Models from De-signer Feedback. (Sept. 2025). arXiv:2509.16779 [cs.HC] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509. 16779 [78] Wei Xiang, Hanfei Zhu, Suqi Lou, Xinli Chen, Zhenghua Pan, Yuxiao Jin, Shuyue Chen, and Lingyun Sun. 2024. SimUser: Generating Usability Feedback by Simulating Various Users Interacting with Mobile Applications. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–17. doi:10.1145/3613904. 3642481 [79] Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. 2024. OSWorld: Benchmarking Multimodal Agents for Open-Ended Tasks in Real Computer Environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,Vol. 37. doi:10.52202/079017-1650 [80] Taofeng Xue, Chong Peng, Mianqiu Huang, Linsen Guo, Tiancheng Han, Haozhe Wang, Jianing Wang, Xiaocheng Zhang, Xin Yang, Dengchang Zhao, Jinrui Ding, Xiandi Ma, Yuchen Xie, Peng Pei, Xunliang Cai, and Xipeng Qiu. 2026. EvoCUA: Evolving Computer Use Agents via Learning from Scalable Synthetic Experience. arXiv:2601.15876 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.15876 [81] Bo Yang, Zhenchang Xing, Xin Xia, Chunyang Chen, Deheng Ye, and Shanping Li. 2021. Don’t do that! hunting down visual design smells in complex uis against design guidelines. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd international conference on software engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 761–772. [82] Shengcheng Yu, Chunrong Fang, Ziyuan Tuo, Quanjun Zhang, Chunyang Chen, Zhenyu Chen, and Zhendong Su. 2025. Vision-Based Mobile App GUI Testing: A Survey. Comput. Surveys 58, 6, Article 142 (Dec. 2025), 46 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3773027 [83] zai-org. 2025. GLM-4.7. https://huggingface.co/zai-org/GLM-4.7. Hugging Face model card; accessed 2026-02-06. [84] Chenchen Zhang, Yuhang Li, Can Xu, Jiaheng Liu, Ao Liu, Changzhi Zhou, Ken Deng, Dengpeng Wu, Guanhua Huang, Kejiao Li, Qi Yi, Ruibin Xiong, Shihui Hu, Yue Zhang, Yuhao Jiang, Zenan Xu, Yuanxing Zhang, Wiggin Zhou, Chayse Zhou, and Fengzong Lian. 2025. ArtifactsBench: Bridging the Visual-Interactive Gap in LLM Code Generation Evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04952 (2025). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2507.04952 [85] Zhuohao (Jerry) Zhang, Eldon Schoop, Jeffrey Nichols, Anuj Mahajan, and Amanda Swearngin. 2025. From Interaction to Impact: Towards Safer AI Agents Through Understanding and Evaluating Mobile UI Operation Impacts. In Pro-ceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . ACM, 727–744. doi:10.1145/3708359.3712153 [86] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al . 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 (2023), 46595–46623. [87] Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yanhan Ye, and Zheyan Luo. 2024. LlamaFactory: Unified Efficient Fine-Tuning of 100+ Language Models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations) , Yixin Cao, Yang Feng, and Deyi Xiong (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Bangkok, Thailand, 400–410. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.acl-demos.38 [88] Mingyuan Zhong, Ruolin Chen, Xia Chen, James Fogarty, and Jacob O Wobbrock. 2025. Screenaudit: Detecting screen reader accessibility errors in mobile apps using large language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–19. [89] Ruican Zhong, David W. McDonald, and Gary Hsieh. 2025. Synthetic Heuristic Evaluation: A Comparison between AI- and Human-Powered Usability Evalua-tion. arXiv:2507.02306 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02306 

## A uxWeb Creation Prompts A.1 Synthetic Website Generation 

We used the following prompt for GLM 4.7 when generating web-sites clones of the 137 real-world sites from Mind2Web. This prompt was determined by trial and error and manual inspection on a small number of test cases. 

You are an expert web developer and designer specializing in modern websites . You are currently handed a barebones React . js template and your jobs is to make a fully working website using React . js . Feel free to use lightweight libraries like Tailwind CSS to enhance the design . Requirements : 1. Create a fully functional , modern , and responsive website design 2. Use only React .js , HTML , CSS , and JavaScript , but feel free to use libraries like Tailwind CSS to make the design better and make layout easier . You can look at the package . json file to see which libraries are already installed and import them . However , you must NEVER install new packages that were not already installed . 3. Include interactive elements where appropriate 4. Make it production - ready and professional 5. You must include all relevant script tags for libraries to work properly . 6. There should NEVER be any dead links or buttons that are visible but do nothing when clicked . 7. The ONLY time you are allowed to run the `npm `

command is to test if the website builds with `npm run build ` command . You must NEVER run `npm ` under any other circumstances . 8. Because you will create a website with very realistic mocked functionality , you will probably need some data . ALWAYS synthetically generate placeholder data that is needed by any functionality on the mocked website . NEVER attempt to connect to online APIs . 9. NEVER include images for which you do not have the appropriate path to (e.g., the " src " attribute ). You should use an API to generate a placeholder instead like < img src =" https :// placehold . co /600 x400 " alt =" Placeholder image "> 10. Do not define any new SVGs - you should use icons from FontAwesome instead from the packages : @fortawesome / fontawesome - svg - core @fortawesome / free - solid - svg - icons @fortawesome / react - fontawesome . You can assume that these packages are installed even though you cannot see them in a package . json in the same directory . 11. NEVER attempt to access any external directory outside of your current directory . Your job is to create a fully functioning clone of the following website : < WEBSITE_NAME > Use the current barebones React . js project with React Router to implement this website , with all important functionality realistically mocked . The main React file is located at src / App . jsx and exports a component called " App ." Make sure your code conforms to this structure . Your workflow should be something like the following : Gao et al. 

1. Think about the target website . Think about as many flows as you can that a user would want to do on this website . 2. Implement the React . js website so that all of flows you thought are fully implemented , interactive , and using the appropriate mock data . 3. Run `npm run build ` command to test that website compiles without any errors . 4. Return to step 1 and repeat until you cannot think of any more flows . When you think you are done , scan for any dead links or unimplemented functionality and implement them . Finally , when you are done , make a txt file in the root directory of the React . js project ( at the same level as the src / directory ) called " flows . txt " that contains all of the flows that you implemented . 

## A.2 Usability Defect Injection Prompt 

We used the following prompt to inject usability defects for our defect-augmented websites. For each website clone, we used this prompt up to eight times to inject usability defects aligned to one of our principles with the provided definition in §3.1.2. 

You are an expert web developer and UI / UX designer in charge of usability testing . You will be given acompletely 1) a completely functional website and 2) potential user flows that can be performed on the website . The website is implemented with React . js with React Router . Your job is to introduce code changes that violate a specific interaction design principle , making the app less usable for that princeiple , while not breaking the website . Types of changes you can make : 1. Delete : // deleting UI elements 2. Add : // including additional UI elements 3. Modify : // modifying UI elements and their functionality App : < WEBSITE_NAME > Flows : flows . txt Principle : < PRINCIPLE > Using the current React . js code in the src / directory : 1. Consider all user flows inside the . txt file and all , the critical steps to these flows , and what changes can be introduced to violate the given principle 2. Change the code in the current directory to violate the given principle . Ensure these changes are fully implemented , interactive , and use the appropriate mock data or modified mock data 3. Run `npm run build ` command to test that website compiles without any errors . 4. Run `npm run build ` to check if all changes made in step 2 are implemented AND show up in the modified code When you are done , make a text file in the current directory ( src /) called changes . txt listing all the changes made to the application that have made it more difficult to use . 

## A.3 Defect-Augmented Examples 

We show four example defect-augmented sites and the usability principle they violate in Figure 6. Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces 

(a) Baseline Interface (Plain synthetic clone) 

(b) Hierarchy  (c) Consistency 

(d) Error Prevention  (e) Memory Load 

Figure 6: Comparison of an original clone from uxWeb and four of its defect-augmented counterparts. (a) shows the baseline design of a clone of the Walmart Careers job search portal. (b)-(e) illustrate different usability defects introduced to create our defect-augmented sites. Gao et al. 

## B Trace Generation Prompts 

We used the following prompt when generating interaction traces on uxWeb: 

Please generate the next move according to the UI screenshot , instruction and previous actions . Instruction : Conduct a usability test of this website . You have a budget of 50 actions you can perform on the website . Use it as efficiently as possible to test all important flows for the website and make the most accurate assessment of usability . First , list the most important user goals for this site . Then , work through at least three distinct key flows that cover those goals , one by one . Use realistic placeholder data if you need to fill any fields . If you are using a date picker widget in a booking flow , remember that the target date usually must be in the future . Today 's date is { DATE }. If given the option , you should try to use a date picker instead of manually entering the date . The date picker control is usually located immediately to the right of the date field . If you encounter errors , try your best to complete the flow but if you cannot complete it , move onto another flow . Do not finish the trace until you have worked through the key flows you listed . 

We made the following addition to the prompt for GPT-5-mini, as without it, it would try to access the internet: 

IMPORTANT : Only interact with the website provided . Do not navigate to or visit any external websites or domains . 

We appended the following prompt at the end of the interaction trace for a final usability score: 

Rate the website usability from 0 to 100. The score should represent the probability that an average user can successfully use the website 's most important flows . You are testing a real website - the site you are testing is NOT a mock / demo / educational app . Review the assistant thoughts from each interaction step and create a list of usability problems . Each observation you make must reference a direct quote from the thought history , and you must rate it as a major or minor issue . Pay special attention to broken navigation , failed page loads , non - responsive clicks , confusing flows , and unfinished core flows . For example , look for thoughts that say " page appears to be stuck or not loading properly ," "I need to wait briefly to ensure the page fully load ", and "I need to wait for the page to load ." If this appears multiple times , that is a red flag because the implementation might not contain that functionality and only appears to be loading . If the thoughts contain " haven 't successfully completed " that is also a red flag . End with exactly one final line : Action : score (< number from 0 to 100 >) . 

## C Study Instructions 

We provided the participants with the following instructions before our study: 

• You will be shown 30 pairs of websites. 

• Your task is to evaluate which website between pairs of websites is more usable. 

• These websites are clones of existing websites so many of the images are text placeholders. When voting, ensure you are evaluating the sites based on their usability. 

• Occasionally websites may take awhile to load or may not reload. If that is the case feel free to move on. 

• You must expand both websites using the expand ( ↔) but-ton before you can vote. 

• Browse each site freely — scroll, click links, and explore as you normally would. 

• DO NOT enter in any personal information during your exploration. Instead, you can provide with fake information such as “John Doe, 123@demo.com, 123-456-7890” 

• While you can choose ties, try and select one website over the other. There are no right or wrong answers — go with your honest impression. We also show a sample screen from our study in Figure 7. 

Figure 7: A screen showing sample comparison participants made during our study. Participants were required to first expand both iframes to explore before they could vote. 

## D Model Hyperparameters 

Table 2: Hyperparameters used to train our model. Algorithm Hyperparameter Value 

uxCUA Effective batch size 8Epochs 1Learning Rate 2e-4 LoRA 32 Margin 15 Training Computer Use Agents to Assess the Usability of Graphical User Interfaces 

## E Additional Evaluation Results E.1 Technical Evaluation on uxWeb 

We provide an additional table of metrics we examined for baseline model performance on uxWeb. Agreement rate was computed to see if models made the same relative predictions as ground-truth labels and human judges. Model assessment was accurate if for a given site, it generated a lower usability score for its paired defect-augmented (or human-rejected) variant. Ties were counted as an error. The score difference is the difference between the model’s predicted score for the chosen and rejected sample in a pair. This can be roughly interpreted as the model’s “confidence” in its decision or how much more usable it believes the non defect-augmented site to be. 

Table 3: Model performance for usability assessment on uxWeb’s ground truths (first four rows) and designer prefer-ences (last four rows). Overall, uxCUA performs better than other models, providing higher agreement for plain sites and defect-augmented sites and for designer preferences. 

Model AUC Agreement Rate Δ

GPT-5-mini 0.436 0.375 -5.68 Kimi K2.5 0.521 0.492 2.58 EvoCUA 0.381 0.322 -6.35 uxCUA 0.632 0.467 5.72 

Condition 

Designers + GPT-5-mini 0.592 0.504 3.83 Designers + Kimi K2.5 0.588 0.522 5.91 Designers + EvoCUA 0.522 0.435 3.44 Designers + uxCUA 0.607 0.530 3.90 

## E.2 Usability Issue Report 

Table 4: Breakdown of the types of usability issues identified by uxCUA on 150 benchmark sites (ones without designer ratings). Overall the model identifies more usability issues related to feedback and control.