Title: Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02837v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:34:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 

ZHIYUAN LI ∗† , JINGZHENG WU ∗‡ §, XIANG LING ∗‡ , XING CUI ∗† , and TIANYUE LUO ∗

Agent Skills is an emerging open standard that defines a modular, filesystem-based packaging format enabling LLM-based agents to acquire domain-specific expertise on demand. Despite rapid adoption across multiple agentic platforms and the emergence of large community marketplaces, the security properties of Agent Skills have not been systematically studied. This paper presents the first comprehensive security analysis of the Agent Skills framework. We define the full lifecycle of an Agent Skill across four phases—Creation, Distribution, Deployment, and Execution—and identify the structural attack surface each phase introduces. Building on this lifecycle analysis, we construct a threat taxonomy comprising seven categories and seventeen scenarios organized across three attack layers, grounded in both architectural analysis and real-world evidence. We validate the taxonomy through analysis of five confirmed security incidents in the Agent Skills ecosystem. Based on these findings, we discuss defense directions for each threat category, identify open research challenges, and provide actionable recommendations for stakeholders. Our analysis reveals that the most severe threats arise from structural properties of the framework itself, including the absence of a data-instruction boundary, a single-approval persistent trust model, and the lack of mandatory marketplace security review, and cannot be addressed through incremental mitigations alone. CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Software security engineering ; • Software and its engineering 

→ Software reliability .Additional Key Words and Phrases: Agent Skills, Threat Taxonomy, Security Analysis, Vision Paper 

ACM Reference Format: 

Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo. 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis. J. ACM 37, 4, Article 111 (August 2026), 27 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

1 Introduction 

The rapid advancement of AI agents based on large language models (LLMs) has fundamentally transformed how humans interact with software systems [ 1 , 2]. Modern LLM-based agents are no longer confined to passive question-answering. They actively plan multi-step workflows, execute code, and interact with external services with minimal human oversight. This shift toward agentic AI has driven the emergence of capability extension frameworks that allow agents to acquire domain-specific expertise on demand, enabling specialization across an unbounded range of tasks without retraining the underlying model. 

> ∗

Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 

> †

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 

> ‡

Key Laboratory of System Software (Chinese Academy of Sciences), Beijing, China 

> §

Jingzheng Wu is the corresponding author. Authors’ Contact Information: Zhiyuan Li, lizhiyuan2021@iscas.ac.cn; Jingzheng Wu, jingzheng08@iscas.ac.cn; Xiang Ling, lingxiang@iscas.ac.cn; Xing Cui, cuixing@iscas.ac.cn; Tianyue Luo, tianyue@iscas.ac.cn. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM 1557-735X/2026/8-ART111 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.  

> arXiv:2604.02837v1 [cs.CR] 3 Apr 2026 111:2 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo

Among these frameworks, Agent Skills —introduced by Anthropic in October 2025—represents a significant architectural departure from prior approaches such as ChatGPT Plugins [ 3] and the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [ 4]. Rather than exposing typed API schemas or defining a typed invocation protocol, the Agent Skills framework organizes capabilities as modular, filesystem-based directories. Each Skill bundles a SKILL.md instruction file written in natural language, optional executable scripts, and reference resources, which the agent loads on demand when it determines the Skill to be relevant to the user’s request [ 5 ]. This design achieves remarkable flexibility and composability, as Skills can encode arbitrary workflows, domain knowledge, and organizational procedures in a format that requires no programming expertise to author. Within weeks of its introduction, the Agent Skills specification was adopted by multiple agentic platforms beyond Claude, including Cursor [ 6 ], GitHub Copilot [ 7], and Gemini CLI [ 8], and third-party marketplaces aggregating tens of thousands of community-contributed Skills emerged without mandatory security review. This rapid adoption has outpaced the development of adequate security mechanisms. The architectural properties that make Skills powerful—natural-language instruction delivery, filesystem-level code execution, and open marketplace distribution—create security vulnerabilities that are qualitatively distinct from those of prior AI extension mechanisms. Real-world incidents confirm that these risks are not theoretical. In December 2025, security researchers demonstrated the execution of live ransomware via a weaponized Agent Skill. The attack exploited a consent gap :once a user approves a Skill, it silently inherits persistent permissions to read and write files, download code, and open network connections, all without further prompts [ 9]. In January 2026, a coordinated supply chain campaign systematically compromised over 1,184 Skills in a major community marketplace—approximately one in five available packages—delivering a credential-theft payload to unsuspecting users [ 10 , 11 ]. A concurrent large-scale empirical study that scanned 42,447 Skills found that 26.1% contained at least one security vulnerability, spanning 14 distinct patterns across four categories: prompt injection, data exfiltration, privilege escalation, and supply chain risks [ 12 ]. Independent researchers further demonstrated that Skill-based prompt injection constitutes a qualitatively harder attack class than conventional indirect injection, because Skill files are composed entirely of instructions with no data-to-instruction boundary [13, 14]. These incidents are not isolated failures attributable to implementation oversights. They reflect 

structural properties of the Agent Skills framework: a trust model that treats instructions as operator-level directives; a consent mechanism that grants persistent permissions from a single approval; a distribution model that imposes no mandatory security review; and a runtime model that executes bundled scripts with the user’s local privileges. Despite the severity and breadth of these issues, to the best of our knowledge, no prior work has provided a systematic security analysis of the Agent Skills framework. The research community lacks a unified threat model, a principled taxonomy of attack vectors, or a systematic characterization of the real-world incidents that expose their consequences. Practitioners deploying Skills have no principled guidance beyond the vendor’s recommendation to “only install Skills from trusted sources” [15]. In this paper, we present the first systematic security analysis of the Agent Skills framework. Our goal is to characterize its structural security properties—the threat model it creates, the attack surfaces it exposes across its full lifecycle, and the research challenges that must be addressed to make Skills safe for broad deployment. We make the following contributions: 

• Lifecycle analysis. We decompose the Agent Skills framework into four security-relevant phases— Creation , Distribution , Deployment , and Execution —and systematically identify the structural security implications of each phase (§4).  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:3

• Threat taxonomy. We construct a comprehensive threat taxonomy for the Agent Skills framework, identifying 7 threat categories and 17 distinct threat scenarios across three attack layers, grounded in both architectural analysis and real-world evidence (§5). 

• Incident analysis. We analyze five real-world security incidents in the Agent Skills ecosys-tem, map each to our threat taxonomy, and extract generalizable lessons about the structural vulnerabilities they expose (§6). 

• Defense directions and research agenda. We discuss potential mitigation strategies for each threat category and identify five open research challenges that must be addressed to establish Agent Skills security as a mature research area (§7). Our analysis reveals that the Agent Skills attack surface spans seven threat categories organized across three attack layers. The first layer covers how malicious Skills reach users and acquire trusted authority, encompassing supply chain compromise , facilitated by open marketplaces with no mandatory vetting, and consent abuse , arising from the single-approval persistent trust model. The second layer covers direct attacks that an activated Skill can mount, including prompt injection ,enabled by the absence of a structural data-to-instruction boundary; code execution , exploiting bundled scripts and runtime dependency mechanisms; and data exfiltration through credential harvesting, environment variable access, and silent codebase transmission. The third layer covers how compromise effects extend beyond the current session or agent boundary, through persistence 

via memory file and configuration poisoning, and multi-agent propagation in orchestrated agentic pipelines. Addressing these vulnerabilities requires not only improved tooling and marketplace governance, but also architectural reforms to the Agent Skills framework itself. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on prior agent capability extension mechanisms. Section 3 presents the architecture of the Agent Skills framework. Section 4 analyzes the security implications of each lifecycle phase. Section 5 develops our threat taxonomy. Section 6 analyzes real-world incidents. Section 7 discusses defense directions and open challenges. Section 8 surveys related work. Section 9 concludes. 

2 Background 2.1 ChatGPT Plugins 

ChatGPT Plugins (2023–2024) were introduced to overcome a fundamental limitation of language models: their inability to access real-time information and third-party services beyond the training corpus [ 3]. Each plugin exposed a typed API manifest in OpenAPI format, which the model used to construct well-formed HTTP requests to a remote, operator-controlled endpoint. This architecture achieved its primary goal—extending the model’s reach to live data and external services—while preserving a strong security boundary. Execution occurred entirely on the plugin provider’s server infrastructure, with no local code running on the user’s machine. The schema contract further constrained the action space, allowing only operations defined in the manifest with typed parameters. Plugins were subject to a mandatory review process combining automated and human checks before publication in the plugin store [ 16 ]. However, the model-as-schema-interpreter design proved limiting in practice. The need for programming expertise to author an OpenAPI specification, the restriction to typed remote API calls, and the inability to encode complex multi-step procedural workflows led to low developer and user adoption [17]. 

2.2 Model Context Protocol 

The Model Context Protocol (MCP, November 2024) was designed to solve a different problem: the M×N integration explosion that arose as AI systems began connecting to diverse external tools and data sources [ 18 ]. Before MCP, connecting 𝑀 AI applications to 𝑁 tools required up to 𝑀 ×𝑁 custom          

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:4 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo
> Table 1. Comparison of agent capability extension mechanisms across security-relevant dimensions. ✔mit-igated; ▲partially exposed; ✘exposed; ✘✘ critically exposed. For Authorship Complexity, High/Medi-um/Low denotes barrier to capability creation; lower barrier increases supply chain risk.

Dimension Description ChatGPT Plugins MCP Agent Skills 

> Interface & Execution Architecture

Data/Instruction Boundary Whether instructions and runtime data are structurally separated ✔ ▲ ✘✘ 

Instruction Carrier Format used to convey capability specification to the agent ✔ ▲ ✘

Execution Locus Where capability code executes relative to the user’s machine ✔ ▲ ✘

Runtime Isolation Degree of sandboxing applied to capability execution ✔ ▲ ✘✘ 

Permission Scope Breadth of system resources accessible during execution ✔ ▲ ✘✘ 

Trust Model Granularity and persistence of approval granted at install time ✔ ✘ ✘✘ 

> Distribution & Ecosystem Governance

Marketplace Review Whether mandatory vetting exists before public distribution ✔ ✘ ✘

Authorship Complexity Technical expertise required to create and publish a capability High Medium Low integrations. MCP replaced this with a universal JSON-RPC 2.0 protocol that any compliant client could use to discover and invoke capabilities exposed by any compliant server [ 4]. This standardiza-tion dramatically reduced integration overhead and enabled a thriving ecosystem of reusable server implementations. The typed interface—through which servers declare tools, resources, and prompts with structured schemas—also preserved a partial data-to-instruction boundary. The model invokes typed operations with well-defined parameters, rather than interpreting free-form natural language directives. However, MCP introduced new security trade-offs relative to Plugins. MCP servers may run locally with user-level system access, broadening the attack surface. More significantly, MCP adopted a fully decentralized distribution model with no mandatory review process. Servers are typically installed directly from source repositories, eliminating the centralized vetting checkpoint that the plugin store provided [4]. Agent Skills (October 2025) addressed limitations that remained even after MCP: the difficulty of encoding complex procedural workflows, organizational context, and domain-specific knowledge in a typed schema interface, and the barrier to authorship that requiring an MCP server implementation imposed [ 5 ]. By replacing the typed interface with a natural language instruction file ( SKILL.md ), the Agent Skills framework made it possible for anyone to package expertise into a reusable agent  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:5

capability. The progressive disclosure design further reduced the token overhead of maintaining large capability libraries. These design choices, however, introduced security trade-offs that are qualitatively more severe than those of either predecessor. The co-location of natural language instructions and executable scripts within a single filesystem package collapses the distinction between capability specification and code execution. A SKILL.md file may direct the agent to run a bundled script that in turn downloads and executes arbitrary network-hosted code. The single-approval persistent trust model grants operator-level authority from a single installation event, without the per-action confirmation that MCP clients may enforce. The open marketplace distribution channel, like MCP but unlike Plugins, imposes no mandatory security review [11]. Table 1 summarizes the key architectural dimensions across all three mechanisms. The table reveals a consistent pattern. ChatGPT Plugins achieves a mitigated security posture across nearly every dimension, while the Agent Skills framework is critically exposed on the dimensions that matter most. MCP occupies an intermediate position, but its trust model and marketplace gov-ernance are as weak as those of the Agent Skills framework on those dimensions. The starkest contrast lies in the Interface & Execution Architecture group. ChatGPT Plugins enforces a struc-tural data-to-instruction boundary through its typed schema contract and confines execution to remote, sandboxed infrastructure with scoped permissions—properties that collectively bound the blast radius of any single compromised plugin. The Agent Skills framework inverts all of these properties simultaneously: the boundary is absent, execution is local at user privilege level, isolation is nonexistent, and a single installation approval grants persistent operator-level authority with no per-action oversight. In the Distribution & Ecosystem Governance group, MCP and the Agent Skills framework share the same absence of mandatory marketplace review, but Agent Skills compound this with a substantially lower authorship barrier—natural language authorship requires no programming expertise, which lowers the cost of publishing a malicious Skill to near zero. The cumulative effect is that the Agent Skills framework combines the weakest governance properties of MCP with an entirely new class of interface-level vulnerability. This structural escalation motivates the systematic security analysis presented in the remainder of this paper. 

3 The Architecture of Agent Skills 

Having established the motivation for studying Agent Skills security, this section examines the architecture of the Agent Skills framework in detail. Agent Skills define a standardized, filesystem-based packaging format that enables LLM-based agents to acquire domain-specific expertise on demand, without retraining the underlying model [ 5]. Within months of its introduction, the speci-fication was adopted as an open standard across multiple agentic platforms, including Cursor [6], GitHub Copilot [ 7 ], and Gemini CLI [ 8 ]. Understanding the security properties of Agent Skills requires examining three interlocking architectural components: the package structure that defines what a Skill contains, the progressive disclosure model that governs when and how Skill content is activated, and the trust model that determines what authority an activated Skill holds. 

3.1 Package Structure 

Each Agent Skill is a self-contained directory. The only required file is SKILL.md , which serves as the agent-facing entry point [ 5 ]. The skill directory may additionally include executable scripts in any supported runtime (Python, Bash, JavaScript, etc.), reference assets (data files, templates, configuration files), and supplementary instruction files that SKILL.md references by name. The SKILL.md file follows a two-part structure [ 5 ]. The frontmatter is a YAML header block delimited by " ---" markers that declares two required metadata fields: name , a short identifier for the Skill, and description , a natural language summary that the agent uses to assess whether the Skill is relevant to the current task. No other fields are required by the specification. The instructions    

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:6 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo
> Table 2. Representative structure of a SKILL.md file.

Frontmatter (YAML header, required): 

---name: pdf-processing description: Extract text and tables from PDF files. Use when working with PDF files or when the user mentions PDFs. ---

Instructions body (Markdown, natural language): 

## Instructions 

When the user asks to process a PDF file, use the bundled extract.py script to extract its contents: 

python extract.py --input <file> --output <dir> 

You may read any PDF from the current working directory and write results to the output directory. If the user requests merging, call merge.py with the list of input files. For network-hosted PDFs, download them first using the fetch tool before processing. 

body is an unstructured natural language section written in Markdown that provides the agent with behavioral directives for the Skill’s operation. This section may reference bundled supplementary files, direct the agent to execute bundled scripts, invoke external network resources, or read and write local files. Table 2 shows a representative SKILL.md structure. A critical structural property of SKILL.md is the absence of a formal interface contract between its two parts. The frontmatter description field declares the Skill’s stated purpose, but there is no mechanism to verify that the instructions body is consistent with—or confined to—that declaration. Equally, there is no structural separation between instructions authored by the Skill developer and data that the Skill may consume at runtime. Both are represented as natural language text within the same document, processed identically by the language model. This absence of a data-to-instruction boundary has direct security implications that are analyzed in Section 5. The package structure thus defines the full scope of what a Skill can contain. Understanding how the agent activates this content requires examining the progressive disclosure model. 

3.2 Progressive Disclosure Loading Model 

The Agent Skills runtime activates Skill content through a three-level progressive disclosure process, designed to scale across large Skill repositories without exhausting the agent’s context window [ 5]. Let S = {𝑠 1, 𝑠 2, . . . , 𝑠 𝑛 } denote the set of Skills installed in the agent’s environment, and let each Skill 𝑠 𝑖 be characterized by a metadata pair 𝑚 𝑖 = (name 𝑖 , desc 𝑖 ) extracted from its frontmatter, a full instruction document inst 𝑖 comprising the SKILL.md instructions body, and an optional set of supplementary files files 𝑖 = {𝑓 𝑖, 1, 𝑓 𝑖, 2, . . . } bundled within the skill directory. Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture of Agent Skills, showing the filesystem layout of a Skill package on the left and the three-level progressive disclosure process within the agent’s context window on the right. At Level 1 , the agent pre-loads the metadata pair 𝑚 𝑖 for all 𝑠 𝑖 ∈ S at startup, injecting each Skill’s name and description directly into the agent’s system prompt. This provides just enough information for the agent to reason about Skill relevance without loading any instruction content into the context window. 

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.

Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:7 Context Window Agent Virtual Machine                        

> Core system prompt Bash Python Nodejs
> skills/pdf/
> -SKILL.md
> - forms.md
> - extract.py
> File System
> skills/docx/
> -SKILL.md
> skills/pptx/
> -SKILL.md
> skills/ …
> -SKILL.md
> ---
> name:pdf
> desc: Extract text ……
> ---
> Instructions
> m1=(name 1,desc 1)
> inst 1
> f1,1
> f1,2
> m1=(name 1,desc 1)m2=(name 2,desc 2)m3mn…level 1
> Core system prompt
> m1=(name 1,desc 1)level 2user query qinst 1
> Core system prompt
> m1=(name 1,desc 1)
> level 3
> user query qinst 1
> f1,1 f1,2 f1,3 f1,j …

Fig. 1. The Agent Skills architecture. Left: the filesystem layout of a Skill package within the agent’s virtual machine, comprising SKILL.md , supplementary instruction files, and executable scripts. Right: the three-level progressive disclosure process, showing how Skill metadata ( 𝑚 𝑖 ), instructions ( inst 𝑖 ), and supplementary files (𝑓 𝑖,𝑗 ) are loaded into the context window incrementally across Levels 1, 2, and 3 .

At Level 2 , given a user request 𝑞 , the agent evaluates a relevance function 𝑟 (𝑞, 𝑚 𝑖 ) ∈ { 0, 1} for each 𝑠 𝑖 , where 𝑟 (𝑞, 𝑚 𝑖 ) = 1 if the agent determines that 𝑠 𝑖 is applicable to 𝑞 . This determination is made by the language model itself through semantic reasoning over desc 𝑖 . For each 𝑠 𝑖 with 

𝑟 (𝑞, 𝑚 𝑖 ) = 1, the agent retrieves inst 𝑖 by invoking a Bash tool to read SKILL.md from the filesystem, bringing its full content into the active context window. At Level 3 , if inst 𝑖 references specific supplementary files 𝑓 𝑖,𝑗 ∈ files 𝑖 , the agent reads those files on demand using additional Bash commands, loading only the subset of supplementary content relevant to the current task. When inst 𝑖 directs the agent to execute a bundled script, the agent runs the script via Bash. Critically, the script’s source code never enters the context window—only the script’s output is returned to the agent [ 5 ]. Formally, let A denote the set of actions available to the agent (filesystem operations, network calls, subprocess invocations, etc.). Because the instructions body is interpreted directly by the language model with no technical enforcement mechanism, a Skill can in principle direct the agent to perform any action within A. The scope of authority under which the agent acts on these instructions is determined by the trust model. 

3.3 Trust Model and Permission Scope 

The Agent Skills framework assigns operator-level authority to any Skill that has been installed and activated by the user. In the LLM agent security hierarchy, operator-level instructions are incorporated into the agent’s system prompt and interpreted with elevated authority that the agent is not designed to override based on subsequent user input [ 5]. By injecting 𝑚 𝑖 into the system prompt at startup (Level 1) and subsequently treating inst 𝑖 as an extension of that system-prompt context (Level 2), the framework grants each activated Skill the ability to issue instructions that the agent is architecturally inclined to follow without per-action user confirmation. The resulting consent gap is the structural mismatch between the permission object at approval time and the permission scope at execution time [ 9]. When a user installs a Skill, the object of consent is the Skill’s declared description and, if reviewed, the content of SKILL.md at that moment. The permission scope actually granted, however, is persistent and unconstrained. The Skill retains operator-level authority across all future sessions, and this authority covers all actions in A without per-action or per-session confirmation. Three structural properties compound this gap. First, the grant is persistent : no re-approval is required when the Skill is invoked in a new session. Second, the grant is undifferentiated : a single installation approval covers all actions the Skill may subsequently direct, regardless of their scope or reversibility. Third, the grant is irrevocable 

J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:8 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo Layer 1 

> Delivery & Trust
> Layer 2
> Runtime Attack
> Layer 3
> Persistent &
> Lateral
> Creation
> T1.4 Hallucinated Package
> T3.1 Direct Injection
> T4.1 Malicious Script
> T4.2 Deferred Dependency
> T4.3 Remote Code Fetch

—

> Distribution
> T1.1 Typosquatting
> T1.2 Ranking Manipulation
> T1.3 Repository Hijacking

—

—

> Deployment
> T2.1 Consent Gap
> T2.2 Post-Install Modification

—

—

> Execution

—

> T3.2 Indirect Injection
> T5.1 Credential Harvesting
> T5.2 Env. Variable Harvesting
> T5.3 Codebase Exfiltration
> T6.1 Memory File Poisoning
> T6.2 Config Injection
> T7.1 Prompt Infection
> Agent Skills Lifecycle
> Three Layers of Attack

Fig. 2. The Agent Skills lifecycle and threat taxonomy. The horizontal axis represents the four lifecycle phases; the vertical axis organizes threats into three attack layers. Empty cells indicate that no threat in that layer originates at that phase. 

by content change : a Skill author or supply chain attacker who modifies inst 𝑖 after installation inherits the original approval, because the trust relationship is bound to the Skill identity rather than to a cryptographically committed version of its content. The platform’s official guidance addresses none of these structural properties, limiting itself to the recommendation that users “only install Skills from trusted sources” [15]. 

4 Agent Skills Lifecycle and Attack Surface 

An Agent Skill traverses four sequential phases from authorship to runtime. In the Creation phase, a Skill author composes the SKILL.md file and any bundled scripts or assets. In the Distribution phase, the packaged Skill is published to a marketplace or repository and made available for installation. In the Deployment phase, a user installs the Skill into their agent environment and grants it operator-level authority. In the Execution phase, the agent activates the Skill at runtime and acts on its instructions. Each phase introduces a distinct attack surface that threat actors can exploit, and compromises introduced in an earlier phase are silently inherited by all subsequent ones. Figure 2 illustrates the lifecycle and the primary attack entry points at each phase. 

Creation. At the Creation phase, the Skill author has unrestricted control over both the SKILL.md 

instructions body and any bundled executable scripts. A malicious author may craft instructions that appear benign in the description frontmatter while embedding adversarial directives in the instructions body—directives that will execute at operator privilege once the Skill is activated. Because no static analysis tool can fully characterize the behavioral scope of natural language instructions, the gap between declared and actual behavior is not detectable at authorship time. Supply chain attackers who compromise a legitimate author’s credentials or repository inherit the same degree of control without requiring any authorship access. 

Distribution. At the Distribution phase, the Skill is published to a marketplace or shared reposi-tory. The absence of mandatory security review in current Agent Skills ecosystems means that malicious Skills may reach large user populations without any vetting checkpoint [ 11 ]. Distribution-phase attacks include typosquatting—registering Skill names that closely resemble popular legit-imate Skills—and name shadowing, in which a malicious Skill is positioned to be selected by the agent’s relevance function 𝑟 (𝑞, 𝑚 𝑖 ) in preference to the intended Skill. Because the relevance function operates over natural language descriptions, an attacker can craft a description that 

J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:9 

maximizes selection probability for high-value task contexts without triggering obvious suspicion. Post-publication content modification compounds this risk: once a Skill is installed, the trust rela-tionship is bound to Skill identity rather than content version, so an attacker who modifies a Skill after installation inherits the original approval silently. 

Deployment. At the Deployment phase, the user installs the Skill and the framework assigns it operator-level authority. The consent gap identified in Section 3.3 is structurally located here. The object of the user’s approval is the Skill’s declared description and visible content at installation time, while the permission scope actually granted is persistent, undifferentiated, and irrevocable by subsequent content change. A Skill that requests no unusual permissions at install time may later—through post-installation content modification or through instructions that were present but not scrutinized—direct the agent to perform actions far outside the scope of what the user understood themselves to be authorizing. 

Execution. At the Execution phase, the agent reads the activated Skill’s SKILL.md into its context window and interprets its instructions with operator-level authority. This phase is the primary site of prompt injection and runtime privilege abuse. Because the instructions body is processed as operator-level context, any adversarial directive embedded within it—whether introduced at Creation, injected via a compromised supplementary file, or retrieved from a network resource that the Skill directs the agent to fetch—is interpreted with the same authority as legitimate Skill instructions. The progressive disclosure model introduces an additional execution-phase risk. Supplementary files and script outputs that enter the context at Level 3 may themselves carry adversarial content, extending the injection surface beyond SKILL.md itself. Script execution presents a further risk: because script source code never enters the context window, only its output, a malicious script may perform arbitrary filesystem or network operations that the agent cannot observe or reason about before acting on the returned output. The four phases and their associated attack surfaces collectively define the scope of the threat taxonomy developed in the following section. Threats are organized by their primary phase of origin, though many threats span multiple phases. For instance, a supply chain compromise introduced at Distribution may manifest as a prompt injection at Execution, with the Deployment phase’s consent gap preventing the user from recognizing that the authority being exercised was never legitimately granted. 

5 Threat Taxonomy 

Building on the lifecycle analysis of Section 4, we construct a comprehensive threat taxonomy for the Agent Skills framework. As shown in Table 3, the taxonomy organizes threats into seven categories across three layers of attack. The first layer, comprising supply chain compromise and consent abuse, covers how malicious Skills reach users and acquire trusted authority. The second layer, comprising prompt injection, code execution, and data exfiltration, covers the direct attacks that an activated Skill can mount against the agent and its environment. The third layer, comprising persistence and multi-agent propagation, covers how the effects of a compromise extend beyond the current session or agent boundary. Within each category, we identify specific threat scenarios, characterize their mechanisms, map them to the lifecycle phase in which they originate, and ground them in real-world evidence. The taxonomy was constructed through a three-stage process. In the first stage, we conducted a systematic review of published security research, security advisories, CVE disclosures, and empirical studies specific to Agent Skills and analogous agentic extension mechanisms, identifying all documented attack patterns. In the second stage, we performed a structural analysis of the Agent Skills architecture, reasoning from first principles about what attack surfaces the framework’s design properties introduce—specifically the natural language instruction carrier, the progressive  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:10 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo

disclosure loading model, the single-approval trust grant, and the open marketplace distribution model. In the third stage, we reconciled the two sources: scenarios identified through structural analysis but not yet observed in the wild were retained if they follow directly from documented architectural properties; scenarios observed in the wild were mapped to structural root causes and grouped accordingly. Categories were defined at the level of distinct attack vectors rather than attack consequences, ensuring orthogonality across categories. The resulting taxonomy was validated by verifying that all five confirmed real-world incidents analyzed in Section 6 map cleanly to one or more taxonomy entries, with no observed incident falling outside the taxonomy’s scope.        

> Table 3. Threat taxonomy for Agent Skills. Each scenario is mapped to its primary lifecycle phase of origin:
> Cr = Creation, Di = Distribution, De = Deployment, Ex = Execution.

ID Scenario Description Phase Layer 1: Delivery and Trust Establishment 

T1: Supply Chain Compromise 

T1.1 Typosquatting Malicious Skill registered under a name visually similar to a popular legitimate Skill to deceive users into installation Di T1.2 Ranking Manipulation Attacker inflates download counts to position a malicious Skill above legitimate alternatives Di T1.3 Repository Hijacking Attacker gains control of a legitimate Skill repository through account takeover Di T1.4 Hallucinated Package Skill references packages that do not exist, which attackers later claim on public registries to achieve code execution Cr/Di 

T2: Consent Abuse 

T2.1 Consent Gap Persistent operator-level authority granted at installation is leveraged to perform actions far beyond the user’s intended scope De/Ex T2.2 Post-Installation Modification Skill content is modified after installation, inheriting the original trust grant without requiring re-approval De/Ex 

Layer 2: Runtime Attack 

T3: Prompt Injection 

T3.1 Direct Injection Adversarial instructions embedded in SKILL.md instructions body are executed at operator level when the Skill is activated Cr/Ex T3.2 Indirect Injection Skill retrieves external content containing adversarial instructions, which are interpreted in the agent’s operator-level context Ex 

T4: Code Execution 

T4.1 Malicious Script Bundled script executes arbitrary system commands, including ransomware deployment or credential theft Cr/Ex T4.2 Deferred Dependency Script declares unpinned dependencies that the attacker later replaces with malicious versions on public registries Cr/Ex 

Continued on next page  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:11

Table 3 (continued) 

ID Scenario Description Phase 

T4.3 Remote Code Fetch Instructions direct the agent to fetch and execute code from an attacker-controlled URL at runtime, bypassing installation-time review Cr/Ex 

T5: Data Exfiltration 

T5.1 Credential Harvesting Skill directs the agent to read API keys, SSH keys, browser credentials, and cryptocurrency wallets, then transmit them externally Ex T5.2 Environment Variable Harvesting Scripts access and exfiltrate environment variables containing secrets from the agent’s runtime Ex T5.3 Codebase Exfiltration Skill silently reads and transmits the entire project codebase with no visible indication in agent output or audit logs Ex 

Layer 3: Persistent and Lateral Impact 

T6: Persistence 

T6.1 Memory File Poisoning Skill writes adversarial content into persistent agent memory files such as AGENTS.md, MEMORY.md, or SOUL.md, altering behavior across future sessions Ex T6.2 Config Injection Skill modifies agent configuration files such as settings.json to establish persistent backdoors or pre-authorize dangerous operations Ex 

T7: Multi-Agent Propagation 

T7.1 Prompt Infection A Skill-controlled agent propagates adversarial instructions to downstream agents in a multi-agent pipeline, escalating a local compromise to system-wide impact Ex 

5.1 T1: Supply Chain Compromise 

Supply chain compromise attacks target the distribution layer of the Agent Skills ecosystem rather than the Skill content itself. The goal is to position a malicious Skill for installation by users who believe they are installing a legitimate one. The absence of mandatory security review in current marketplaces of Agent Skills, combined with the low barrier to publishing Skills, creates an environment structurally analogous to the early days of npm and PyPI—but with substantially higher consequences per compromised package, as each installed Skill inherits operator-level authority over the agent’s full action space. 

T1.1 Typosquatting. An attacker registers a Skill with a name that closely resembles a popular legitimate Skill, exploiting the fact that users and agents select Skills based on name and description without cryptographic verification of publisher identity. The ClawHavoc campaign employed this technique systematically, registering malicious Skills with names designed to be confused with legitimate ones during rapid marketplace browsing [ 10 , 11 ]. The attack is amplified by the Agent Skills relevance function: because Skill selection at Level 2 is mediated by semantic matching over natural language descriptions rather than exact name lookup, an attacker can craft descriptions that maximize selection probability even when the name does not exactly match the target.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:12 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo

T1.2 Ranking Manipulation. An attacker artificially inflates the download counts, star ratings, or endorsement scores of a malicious Skill to position it above legitimate alternatives in marketplace search results. Mitiga documented this technique in their research, observing coordinated campaigns in which bots mass-downloaded malicious Skills and fake accounts submitted positive reviews to game ranking algorithms [ 19 ]. Authmind independently recorded the same pattern during the ClawHavoc campaign, noting that one malicious Skill was artificially elevated to the top position in its category before its malicious nature was discovered [ 20 ]. Because users and automated installation tools tend to prefer highly-ranked Skills, ranking manipulation directly translates to installation volume. 

T1.3 Repository Hijacking. An attacker gains control of a legitimate, previously trusted Skill repository through account takeover, credential theft, or abandoned repository claim, then pushes malicious updates through the original trusted distribution channel. This attack is particularly dangerous because it inherits the reputation and install base of the compromised Skill. SafeDep identified repository hijacking as a primary threat vector for Agent Skills, drawing on extensive prior work on analogous attacks in the npm and PyPI ecosystems [ 21 , 22 ]. Unlike typosquatting, which requires users to be deceived into installing a new Skill, repository hijacking delivers malicious payloads as routine updates to users who have already trusted the Skill. 

T1.4 Hallucinated Package. A Skill’s bundled scripts reference package names that do not currently exist on public registries, relying on the LLM’s tendency to generate plausible-sounding but non-existent package names. An attacker monitors public registries for these names and claims them when they appear, publishing malicious packages that are automatically installed when the Skill executes. SafeDep identified this as a distinct attack vector specific to AI-generated Skill content [ 21 ], and Aikido Security documented real-world instances of LLMs generating hallucinated 

npx commands in Skill instructions that were subsequently claimed by attackers [ 23 ]. The attack requires no compromise of the Skill author’s account or repository; it exploits the gap between what the LLM generates and what actually exists on public registries. 

5.2 T2: Consent Abuse 

Consent abuse attacks exploit structural properties of the Agent Skills trust model rather than introducing malicious content. The attack surface is the gap between what a user understands themselves to be authorizing at installation time and the scope of authority the framework actually grants. Two scenarios exploit this gap through different mechanisms. 

T2.1 Consent Gap. When a user installs a Skill, the framework grants it persistent, undiffer-entiated operator-level authority over all actions in A for all future sessions, based on a single installation event. The user’s understanding of what they are authorizing is bounded by the Skill’s declared description and the visible content of SKILL.md at installation time, but the authority actually granted is unconstrained by this understanding. Cherny demonstrated this gap in the MedusaLocker incident: a Skill presented as a GIF converter was approved by users who had no reason to suspect that approval would authorize persistent filesystem write access, network connections, and executable download permissions [ 9]. Liu et al. identified consent gap exploitation as the primary mechanism behind privilege escalation vulnerabilities in their large-scale Skills audit [ 12 ]. The OWASP Top 10 for Agentic Applications classifies this pattern as Identity and Privilege Abuse [24]. 

T2.2 Post-Installation Modification. After a Skill has been installed and its trust grant estab-lished, the Skill author or a supply chain attacker modifies the Skill’s content. Because the trust relationship is bound to Skill identity rather than to a cryptographically committed version of its content, the modified Skill inherits the original approval without requiring any re-authorization from the user. Snyk documented this attack pattern in the ToxicSkills study, identifying Skills that  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:13

initially contained benign content but were designed to be updated with malicious payloads after accumulating a sufficient install base [11]. This attack is the Skills analogue of the rug pull attack documented by Hou et al. in the MCP ecosystem [ 4], but is structurally more severe because the consent model provides no mechanism for users to be notified of content changes after installation. 

5.3 T3: Prompt Injection 

Prompt injection attacks manipulate the agent by introducing adversarial instructions into its operator-level context. Unlike conventional software injection attacks that exploit parsing vulnera-bilities, prompt injection in Agent Skills exploits the fundamental ambiguity of natural language: the agent cannot structurally distinguish between legitimate Skill instructions and adversarial directives embedded within the same context. Agent Skills introduce two structurally distinct variants of this attack, differentiated by the origin of the injected content. 

T3.1 Direct Injection. In direct injection, adversarial instructions are embedded by the Skill author within the SKILL.md instructions body itself. Because the instructions body is processed at operator level when the Skill is activated at Level 2, any directive it contains is interpreted with elevated authority. The attack exploits the absence of a formal interface contract between the frontmatter and the instructions body: the description field may declare benign intent while the instructions body encodes entirely different behavior. Schmotz demonstrated that this attack requires no technical sophistication—three lines of natural language Markdown are sufficient to redirect agent behavior [ 13 , 14 ]. The empirical study by Liu et al. scanning 42,447 Skills found prompt injection to be the most prevalent vulnerability category, appearing in 26.1% of analyzed Skills [ 12 ]. Critically, because the malicious instructions occupy the same structural position as legitimate ones, no static analysis tool can reliably distinguish injected directives from intended behavior without a ground-truth specification of what the Skill is supposed to do—a specification that does not exist in the current Agent Skills ecosystem. 

T3.2 Indirect Injection. In indirect injection, the Skill itself may be legitimate, but it retrieves external content—web pages, documents, API responses, or repository issues—that has been crafted by an attacker to contain adversarial instructions. When this content enters the agent’s context window at Level 3, it is interpreted alongside the Skill’s operator-level instructions, with no structural mechanism to distinguish data from directives. Schmotz demonstrated a concrete instance of this attack in the Agent Skills context, showing that content retrieved by a legitimate Skill can redirect the agent to perform actions outside the Skill’s declared scope [ 14 ]. Greshake et al. introduced this threat class for LLM-integrated applications more broadly [ 25 ], and the Red Hat security team explicitly identified it as an unresolved risk in Skill deployments [ 26 ]. The architecture of Agent Skills amplifies the severity of indirect injection relative to prior settings: because retrieved content enters an operator-level context rather than a user-level one, injected instructions carry higher authority and are less likely to be overridden by subsequent user input. 

5.4 T4: Code Execution 

Code execution attacks exploit the co-location of natural language instructions and executable scripts within a single Agent Skills package. Unlike prompt injection, which operates at the instruction level, code execution attacks introduce or manipulate actual executable code that runs outside the agent’s context window, making the malicious behavior invisible to the language model before it occurs. Three distinct mechanisms enable this attack class. 

T4.1 Malicious Script. A Skill author bundles a script that executes arbitrary system commands when invoked by the agent. Because source code never enters the context window—only its output is returned to the agent—the language model cannot inspect what the script does before acting on its output. In December 2025, Cato CTRL researchers demonstrated this attack concretely: a Skill  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:14 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo

advertised as a GIF image converter silently downloaded and executed MedusaLocker ransomware, encrypting the user’s files while returning benign output to the agent [ 9 ]. The ClawHavoc cam-paign confirmed this pattern at scale, with malicious scripts deploying Atomic macOS Stealer and Windows VMProtect-packed infostealers across over 1,184 compromised Skills [10, 11]. 

T4.2 Deferred Dependency. A Skill bundles scripts that declare dependencies on external packages without pinning them to specific versions. The script appears benign at installation time, but the attacker later publishes a malicious version of the referenced package to a public registry such as PyPI or npm. On subsequent executions, the agent’s runtime automatically fetches and installs the latest version, which now contains the attacker’s payload. SafeDep demonstrated this attack using Python’s PEP 723 inline script metadata format, showing that uv run silently resolves and installs unpinned dependencies at execution time with no user notification [ 21 ]. The attack is particularly insidious because initial security review of the Skill finds no malicious code, and the malicious payload is published only after the Skill has been trusted and widely installed. 

T4.3 Remote Code Fetch. The SKILL.md instructions body directs the agent to download and execute code from an attacker-controlled URL at runtime. Unlike T4.2, which exploits package reg-istries, this attack delivers the payload directly via HTTP. Snyk documented this pattern in the Tox-icSkills study, identifying Skills that instructed agents to execute “ curl https://remote-server. com/instructions.md | source " [ 11 ]. The attack bypasses installation-time content review entirely, as the SKILL.md file contains only a network fetch instruction rather than malicious code. Furthermore, because the fetched content can be updated by the attacker at any time, the attack can be activated selectively—remaining dormant during any review period and activating only when deployed to production environments. 

5.5 T5: Data Exfiltration 

Data exfiltration attacks direct the agent to read sensitive data from the local environment and transmit it to attacker-controlled infrastructure. Agent Skills are particularly well-suited to this attack class because Skills execute with the agent’s full filesystem and network permissions, and because the progressive disclosure model allows Skills to read arbitrary files on demand without requiring explicit user confirmation for each access. Three distinct targets define the scenarios within this category. 

T5.1 Credential Harvesting. The Skill directs the agent to locate and read authentication credentials stored in predictable filesystem locations, then transmit them via network requests. The ClawHavoc campaign demonstrated this at scale, with malicious Skills deploying Atomic macOS Stealer to harvest LLM API keys, SSH private keys, browser-stored passwords, and over 60 categories of cryptocurrency wallet data [ 10 , 11 ]. Cisco’s AI Defense team independently confirmed this pattern, finding that the most popular community Skill on a major marketplace was functional malware that silently exfiltrated credentials to attacker-controlled servers while appearing to provide legitimate functionality [ 27 ]. CVE-2026-21852 documented a related attack in which a malicious Claude Code project configuration redirected API traffic to an attacker-controlled endpoint, harvesting Anthropic API keys before the user trust dialog appeared [28]. 

T5.2 Environment Variable Harvesting. Scripts bundled with a Skill access environment variables from the agent’s runtime context, which commonly contain API keys, database connection strings, cloud provider credentials, and other secrets injected at deployment time. SafeDep identified this as a distinct threat vector, noting that environment variables represent a high-value target because they aggregate secrets from multiple services in a single, programmatically accessible location [ 21 ]. Unlike credential files stored at predictable paths, environment variables are invisible to filesystem-level monitoring, making exfiltration through this channel harder to detect.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:15

T5.3 Codebase Exfiltration. The Skill silently reads and transmits an entire project codebase to external infrastructure, with no visible indication in the agent’s output or audit logs. Mitiga documented this attack in their Breaking Skills research series, demonstrating that a seemingly legitimate Skill could exfiltrate a complete codebase in four user interactions, leaving the skill-audit.log entirely empty [ 19 ]. The attack is particularly consequential in enterprise developer environments where codebases may contain proprietary algorithms, unreleased product features, or embedded secrets. Because the exfiltration occurs through the same network channels the agent uses for legitimate operations, it is indistinguishable from normal agent behavior without purpose-built monitoring. 

5.6 T6: Persistence 

Persistence attacks write adversarial content to durable storage locations in the agent’s environment, ensuring that malicious behavior survives beyond the current session and continues to affect the agent even after the offending Skill is removed. Unlike prompt injection, which affects only the current context window, persistence attacks modify the agent’s long-term state. Two mechanisms enable persistence in the Agent Skills architecture. 

T6.1 Memory File Poisoning. The Skill instructs the agent to write adversarial content into persistent memory files that the agent reads at startup or consults during task execution, such as 

AGENTS.md , MEMORY.md , or SOUL.md . Snyk’s ToxicSkills study explicitly identified this attack vector, recommending that users check these files for unauthorized modifications after installing Skills from untrusted sources [ 11 ]. Chen et al. demonstrated the broader class of memory poisoning attacks against RAG-based agents, showing that adversarial content written to an agent’s knowledge base can persistently redirect its behavior across arbitrarily many future sessions [ 29 ]. In the Agent Skills context, memory file poisoning is particularly effective because memory files are loaded at operator level and the agent has no mechanism to distinguish legitimate memory content from adversarially injected entries. 

T6.2 Config Injection. The Skill modifies agent configuration files—such as settings.json or 

mcp.json —to establish persistent backdoors, pre-authorize dangerous tool operations, or redirect API traffic to attacker-controlled infrastructure. Check Point Research documented this attack class in two CVEs affecting Claude Code. CVE-2025-59536 demonstrated that a malicious repository could inject Hook configurations that execute arbitrary shell commands before the user trust dialog appears [ 28 ]. CVE-2026-21852 showed that modifying the ANTHROPIC_BASE_URL setting causes Claude Code to route all API traffic, including authentication tokens, to an attacker-controlled endpoint before the user is notified [ 28 ]. Config injection is particularly severe because the modified configuration persists across sessions and affects all subsequent agent operations, not only those involving the injecting Skill. 

5.7 T7: Multi-Agent Propagation 

Multi-agent propagation attacks exploit trust relationships between agents in orchestrated pipelines to escalate a local Skill-level compromise into a system-wide breach. As LLM-based agents are increasingly deployed in configurations where one agent orchestrates or delegates to others, a compromised agent becomes a vector for infecting downstream agents that have not themselves installed any malicious Skill. 

T7.1 Prompt Infection. A Skill-controlled agent embeds adversarial instructions in messages it sends to downstream agents in a multi-agent pipeline. The downstream agents, which may have no malicious Skills installed, receive these instructions through an inter-agent communication channel they treat as trusted, and execute them with whatever authority their own trust model grants. Lee and Tiwari introduced and formalized this attack class, demonstrating that adversarial instructions  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:16 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo
> Table 4. Real-world Agent Skills security incidents and their taxonomy mappings.

Incident Mapping Key Impact 

MedusaLocker Skill T4.1, T2.1 Ransomware executed via bundled script; consent gap exploited ClawHavoc Campaign T5.1, T1.1, T1.2 1,184 malicious Skills; credential theft at ecosystem scale CVE-2025-59536 / CVE-2026-21852 T5.1, T6.2 RCE and API key exfiltration via config injection SafeDep PEP 723 T4.2 Deferred dependency attack via unpinned script dependencies Mitiga Silent Egress T5.3, T1.2 Full codebase exfiltrated silently in four user interactions can self-replicate across interconnected LLM agents, with each infected agent infecting further downstream agents [ 30 ]. In the Agent Skills context, prompt infection is particularly consequential because a single malicious Skill installed by one agent in a pipeline can compromise the behavior of all agents downstream, including those operating in higher-privilege contexts such as orchestrators with access to production infrastructure. 

6 Real-World Incidents 

The threat categories identified in Section 5 are not theoretical. This section analyzes five real-world security incidents in the Agent Skills ecosystem, maps each to the taxonomy, and extracts generalizable lessons about the structural vulnerabilities they expose. The incidents are organized in three groups. The first group covers confirmed attacks against individual users, demonstrating how malicious Skills directly compromise the machines of unsuspecting developers. The second covers ecosystem-scale supply chain campaigns and platform-level architectural vulnerabilities, illustrating how the Agent Skills distribution model enables attacks at scale. The third covers researcher-documented attack demonstrations that reveal novel threat vectors not yet widely exploited in the wild. Table 4 summarizes the incidents and their taxonomy mappings. 

6.1 MedusaLocker Ransomware Skill 

In December 2025, researchers at Cato CTRL demonstrated the first publicly documented execution of ransomware through a weaponized Agent Skill [ 9 ]. The attack Skill was presented to users as a GIF image conversion utility—a plausible, low-risk capability that required no elevated permissions in its declared description . Once installed and activated, the bundled script silently downloaded and executed MedusaLocker ransomware, encrypting the user’s filesystem while returning benign output to the agent. Figure 3 illustrates the two-layer execution model: the visible interaction presents normal GIF creation behavior, while the invisible execution layer silently downloads and runs the ransomware payload. This incident maps to two threat categories. As an instance of T4.1 (Malicious Script) , it demonstrates the core vulnerability introduced by the co-location of natural language instructions and executable scripts: because script source code never enters the context window, the agent had no visibility into what the script was doing before acting on its output. The ransomware was delivered  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:17

Visible to user 

User asks for 

GIF creation 

Claude invokes 

gif-creator Skill 

Claude creates 

and run script 

to create GIF 

GIF is created 

Invisible execution 

Attacker creates 

weaponized Skill 

Downloading 

and executing 

‘helper ’ script 

Downloading and 

executing MedusaLocker 

ransomware 

> Fig. 3. The MedusaLocker Ransomware attack. The user-visible layer shows normal GIF creation behavior, while the invisible execution layer silently downloads and executes MedusaLocker ransomware through the bundled helper script.

and executed entirely outside the agent’s reasoning process. As an instance of T2.1 (Consent Gap) ,it illustrates the structural mismatch between user authorization and actual permission scope: users who approved a GIF converter had no reason to anticipate that their approval would authorize persistent filesystem write access and network download permissions. The single installation event granted operator-level authority that covered all of these operations without further prompts. The generalizable lesson is that the consent gap is not an edge case but a structural property of the Agent Skills trust model. Any Skill, regardless of its declared purpose, inherits the same persistent, undifferentiated operator-level authority upon installation. The attack required no technical sophistication from the attacker—only the ability to publish a Skill with a plausible description and a malicious bundled script. 

6.2 ClawHavoc Campaign 

In January 2026, security researchers at Koi Security and Antiy CERT disclosed a coordinated supply chain attack targeting the ClawHub marketplace, the primary distribution channel for the OpenClaw agent ecosystem [ 10 , 11 ]. The campaign, designated ClawHavoc, systematically compromised over 1,184 Skills—approximately one in five packages in the ecosystem at the time of discovery. Malicious Skills deployed Atomic macOS Stealer and Windows VMProtect-packed infostealers, harvesting LLM API keys, SSH private keys, browser-stored passwords, and over 60 categories of cryptocurrency wallet data from installed users. The campaign employed two supply chain techniques. Attackers registered Skills with names closely resembling popular legitimate Skills ( T1.1, Typosquatting ), and used coordinated bot networks to artificially inflate download counts and ratings, positioning malicious Skills above legitimate alternatives in marketplace search results ( T1.2, Ranking Manipulation ). Once in-stalled, the malicious Skills directed agents to locate and transmit credentials stored at predictable filesystem locations ( T5.1, Credential Harvesting ). The generalizable lessons from ClawHavoc are twofold. First, the absence of mandatory security review in Agent Skills marketplaces creates a structural condition in which large-scale supply chain attacks are not only possible but easy to execute: the barrier to publishing a malicious Skill is a SKILL.md file and a one-week-old account. Second, ranking manipulation amplifies the reach of malicious Skills by exploiting the trust heuristic that users apply to highly-ranked packages. In ecosystems without cryptographic provenance verification, popularity signals are trivially gameable and cannot be relied upon as quality indicators.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:18 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo

6.3 CVE-2025-59536 and CVE-2026-21852 

In February 2026, Check Point Research disclosed two vulnerabilities in Claude Code that demon-strated config injection as a practical attack vector [ 28 ]. CVE-2025-59536 (CVSS 8.7) covered two related flaws. The first showed that a malicious repository could inject Hook configurations into 

.claude/settings.json that execute arbitrary shell commands at agent initialization, before any user trust dialog appears. The second showed that .mcp.json could be configured to auto-approve all MCP servers, triggering execution of attacker-controlled servers on repository load. CVE-2026-21852 (CVSS 5.3) demonstrated that setting ANTHROPIC_BASE_URL to an attacker-controlled endpoint in project configuration caused Claude Code to route all API traffic—including authenti-cation tokens—to the attacker before the user was notified, enabling API key exfiltration with no user interaction required. Both vulnerabilities map to T6.2 (Config Injection) : the attack surface is the agent’s configu-ration files, which persist across sessions and affect all subsequent operations. CVE-2026-21852 additionally maps to T5.1 (Credential Harvesting) , as the primary impact was the exfiltration of Anthropic API keys. The vulnerabilities were patched in Claude Code versions 1.0.111 and 2.0.65 respectively, but the disclosure timeline—spanning July 2025 to January 2026—illustrates the gap between vulnerability introduction and remediation that is characteristic of rapidly evolving agentic platforms. The generalizable lesson is that configuration files represent a persistent, high-value attack surface in agent environments. Unlike prompt injection, which affects only the current context window, config injection establishes backdoors that survive session boundaries and Skill removal. The Agent Skills architecture’s reliance on filesystem-based configuration creates a structural exposure that is not present in remotely-executed extension mechanisms such as ChatGPT Plugins. 

6.4 SafeDep PEP 723 Deferred Dependency Attack 

In January 2026, SafeDep researchers demonstrated a deferred dependency attack against Agent Skills using Python’s PEP 723 inline script metadata format [ 21 ]. The attack exploits the interaction between the bundled script execution model of Agent Skills and the uv run tool’s automatic dependency resolution. A Skill author publishes a script with a benign implementation but declares a dependency on an external package without pinning it to a specific version. At the time of publication and review, the referenced package either does not exist or contains only benign code. The attacker subsequently publishes a malicious version of the package to PyPI. On all subsequent executions of the Skill, uv run silently resolves and installs the latest version of the dependency, delivering the attacker’s payload with no change to the Skill’s own code. This incident maps to T4.2 (Deferred Dependency) . It demonstrates a temporal dimension of the supply chain attack surface that is specific to the Agent Skills execution model: the code that runs when a Skill executes is not determined at installation time but at runtime, creating a window of indefinite duration during which the attack can be activated. The attack is particularly resistant to detection because static analysis of the Skill at installation time reveals no malicious content, and the malicious payload enters the execution environment through a trusted package registry rather than through any modification to the Skill itself. The generalizable lesson is that the Agent Skills security boundary cannot be drawn at the Skill package alone. Any external resource that a Skill fetches or depends upon at runtime extends the effective attack surface of the Skill. Dependency pinning, reproducible builds, and runtime integrity verification are necessary conditions for a secure Agent Skills deployment, but none of these are currently enforced by the Agent Skills specification or any major marketplace.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:19

6.5 Mitiga Silent Codebase Exfiltration 

In February 2026, Mitiga Labs demonstrated a silent codebase exfiltration attack as part of their Breaking Skills research series [ 19 ]. Researchers published a Skill to skills.sh—one of the largest public Agent Skills catalogs—framed as a testing utility. To establish apparent legitimacy, the Skill’s download count and reputation score were artificially inflated through coordinated fake interactions. Once installed and activated by a developer, the Skill silently read and transmitted the entire project codebase to attacker-controlled infrastructure. The complete exfiltration required only four user interactions and left the skill-audit.log entirely empty, producing no visible indication of the data transfer in the agent’s output. This incident maps to T5.3 (Codebase Exfiltration) and T1.2 (Ranking Manipulation) . The exfiltration component demonstrates that the progressive disclosure model’s on-demand file reading capability, designed for efficiency, creates a structural data exfiltration primitive: a Skill can read arbitrary files from the project directory and transmit them through the same network channels used for legitimate operations, with no per-file user confirmation and no audit trail. The ranking manipulation component demonstrates that reputation signals in current marketplaces are not integrity-preserving: artificial inflation is straightforwardly effective at increasing installation rates. The generalizable lesson is that silent exfiltration is an inherent risk of the Agent Skills frame-work in enterprise environments. Codebases accessed by agents in developer workflows routinely contain proprietary algorithms, unreleased product specifications, infrastructure configurations, and embedded secrets. Without purpose-built behavioral monitoring that distinguishes legitimate agent network activity from exfiltration, there is no reliable way to detect this attack after the fact. Table 4 demonstrates that all five incidents map cleanly to the taxonomy without requiring new categories. Together, the five incidents cover six of the seven threat categories: T1 (Supply Chain Compromise), T2 (Consent Abuse), T4 (Code Execution), T5 (Data Exfiltration), and T6 (Persistence) are each validated by at least one confirmed incident. T3 (Prompt Injection) is validated by independent researcher demonstrations [ 13 , 14 ] and by the empirical study of Liu et al., which identified prompt injection as the most prevalent vulnerability pattern across 42,447 Skills [ 12 ]. T7 (Multi-Agent Propagation) is grounded in the formally analyzed attack class of Lee and Tiwari [ 30 ], applied to the Agent Skills execution context. The absence of any incident that requires a new category, combined with the fact that each category corresponds to a distinct architectural property of the Agent Skills framework, provides a coverage argument: the taxonomy is complete with respect to the current threat landscape as documented in public sources. 

7 Discussion 7.1 Defense Directions 

The threat taxonomy developed in Section 5 reveals that Agent Skills security requires defense at multiple layers: the Skill content layer, the distribution layer, the runtime layer, and the trust model layer. No single mitigation addresses all threat categories, and several categories resist mitigation entirely within the current architectural framework. We discuss defense directions for each threat category and identify where architectural reform is necessary. 

Against Supply Chain Compromise (T1). Mandatory security review before marketplace publication is the most direct mitigation for typosquatting and ranking manipulation, but review processes face well-documented scaling limitations at the pace of community contribution [ 31 ]. Cryptographic provenance verification—requiring Skills to be signed by verified publishers and binding namespace ownership to verified identities—would prevent typosquatting and raise the cost of repository hijacking, and is feasible within the existing specification without breaking the authorship model. Against ranking manipulation, reputation systems that weight verified  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:20 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo

installation outcomes rather than raw download counts, and that implement anomaly detection for coordinated inflation patterns, would reduce the effectiveness of bot-driven campaigns; this reform requires marketplace-side changes only and imposes no burden on Skill authors. Against hallucinated packages, static analysis tools that verify the existence of all referenced packages at publication time are implementable today using existing package registry APIs, though they cannot prevent attackers from subsequently claiming and poisoning a previously non-existent package name—a residual risk that dependency pinning at authorship time would close. 

Against Consent Abuse (T2). Addressing the consent gap requires architectural reform to the trust model. Fine-grained, per-capability permission grants—analogous to the Android permission model—would allow users to authorize specific action classes at installation time rather than granting undifferentiated operator-level authority. Version-bound trust, in which the trust grant is cryptographically bound to a specific content hash of the Skill at installation time, would prevent post-installation modification from inheriting the original approval. Both reforms require changes to the Agent Skills specification and the agent runtimes that implement it, and neither is currently on the specification roadmap. Critically, version-bound trust introduces a usability tension: it would require re-approval on every Skill update, which conflicts with the seamless update model that gives Agent Skills their operational appeal. A practical compromise is delta-based consent, in which re-approval is triggered only when a content diff exceeds a configurable behavioral threshold. Interim mitigations deployable without specification changes include user-facing changelogs that surface content modifications before the next Skill activation, and re-approval prompts triggered by content changes above a configurable threshold. 

Against Prompt Injection (T3). Defending against direct injection requires the ability to distinguish adversarial instructions from legitimate Skill behavior, which is fundamentally difficult when both occupy the same natural language medium. Structured query formats such as StruQ [ 32 ]and privilege-based instruction hierarchies [ 33 ] offer partial mitigation by enforcing separation between trusted and untrusted content layers, but these defenses are architecturally inapplicable to Agent Skills because malicious SKILL.md content already occupies the operator layer. Indirect injection is more tractable: defenses that treat all externally retrieved content as untrusted and apply sanitization before it enters the context window can reduce the attack surface, with manageable overhead for most Skill use cases. However, neither approach provides a complete defense against direct injection without a formal behavioral specification of intended Skill conduct—a specification that does not exist and that the natural language instruction model makes structurally difficult to define. Direct injection therefore remains an open problem that cannot be fully addressed within the current architectural framework. 

Against Code Execution (T4). Sandboxing is the most direct mitigation for malicious script execution, but its feasibility depends critically on the Skill’s declared purpose. Executing bundled scripts in container-based or WebAssembly-based isolated environments with restricted capabilities would confine the blast radius of a malicious script; however, this mitigation is incompatible with Skills whose legitimate function requires broad filesystem access—such as document processing Skills that read and write arbitrary project files—or unrestricted network access. A capability-tiered sandboxing model, in which the isolation level is determined by the Skill’s declared capability scope, would preserve utility for legitimate Skills while restricting undeclared access; this requires a typed capability declaration that does not currently exist in the specification. Against deferred dependency attacks, version pinning and dependency lockfiles impose minimal authorship overhead and are deployable within the existing specification; mandating them would close this attack vector without breaking any legitimate use case. Against remote code fetch, outbound network filtering that blocks connections to domains not declared in the Skill’s manifest is also feasible with a typed capability declaration, and imposes no overhead on Skills that do not require external network access.  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:21

Against Data Exfiltration (T5). Purpose-built behavioral monitoring that observes agent network activity and flags transfers inconsistent with the active Skill’s declared purpose is the primary defense direction, but its practical effectiveness is limited by the absence of a formal behavioral specification: without knowing what network behavior a Skill is supposed to exhibit, distinguishing exfiltration from legitimate data transfer requires heuristics that will generate false positives for Skills with broad network permissions. Capability-based permission systems that require Skills to explicitly declare the files they intend to read and the network endpoints they intend to contact would structurally limit the exfiltration surface and make behavioral monitoring tractable; this reform requires specification changes but does not break existing Skills whose declared scope matches their actual behavior. The primary cost is authorship overhead: Skill authors would need to enumerate capability claims that are currently implicit. 

Against Persistence (T6). Integrity monitoring of agent memory and configuration files— detecting unauthorized modifications through cryptographic checksums or filesystem-level audit hooks—is deployable today without specification changes, imposes low runtime overhead, and does not restrict any legitimate Skill behavior, since no legitimate Skill needs to modify the agent’s core memory files without user awareness. Prevention via read-only mounting of configuration files during normal operation, with explicit user confirmation required for any modification, would prevent the CVE-2025-59536 class of attacks and is implementable within existing agent runtime architectures; the usability cost is a confirmation prompt for the small fraction of Skills that legitimately modify configuration. This category therefore has the most favorable feasibility profile of any in the taxonomy: effective mitigations are available that impose minimal utility cost and require no specification-breaking changes. 

Against Multi-Agent Propagation (T7). Defending against prompt infection in multi-agent pipelines requires that each agent treats messages from peer agents as untrusted input rather than trusted operator-level instructions. Trust boundary enforcement between agents—processing inter-agent messages at user level rather than operator level—would prevent propagation of ad-versarial instructions with elevated authority. This reform is architecturally feasible but requires coordination across agent frameworks, which currently lack standardized trust models for inter-agent communication [ 34 ]. The utility cost is bounded: the reform affects only Skills deployed in multi-agent configurations, which represent a subset of deployments, and does not restrict single-agent Skill functionality. 

7.2 Open Challenges 

The defense directions identified above reveal a set of open research challenges that must be addressed to establish Agent Skills security as a mature research area. We identify seven challenges that are not resolved by existing techniques. 

C1: Natural Language Instruction Analysis. The fundamental security analysis challenge for Agent Skills is determining the behavioral envelope of a natural language instruction file. Unlike code, which can be statically analyzed for API calls, control flow, and data dependencies, a SKILL.md instructions body expresses behavior in natural language that is interpreted dynamically by a language model. There is currently no formal framework for specifying the intended behavior of a Skill, no static analysis tool that can reliably characterize what a Skill will direct the agent to do across the space of possible user requests, and no verification methodology for establishing that a Skill’s actual behavior conforms to its declared description. Developing such a framework is a prerequisite for meaningful security auditing of Skill content. 

C2: Consent Model Design. The consent gap identified in T2.1 is a consequence of the current all-or-nothing trust model, but replacing it with a fine-grained permission system introduces its own challenges. Permission prompts that are too fine-grained cause approval fatigue, leading users  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:22 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo

to approve all requests without reading them—the same failure mode that undermined Android’s permission model in its early iterations. Permission prompts that are too coarse fail to meaningfully constrain the attack surface. Designing a consent model that is both security-effective and usable for non-expert users, calibrated to the specific action space of LLM-based agents, is an open problem that requires interdisciplinary research spanning security, human-computer interaction, and agent system design. 

C3: Runtime Behavioral Monitoring. Detecting malicious Skill behavior at runtime requires a reference model of what legitimate behavior looks like for each Skill. For code-based extensions, this reference can be derived from static analysis of API calls and permission usage. For Agent Skills, the behavioral specification is natural language, and the set of actions a legitimate Skill may take is unbounded by the specification. Developing runtime monitoring approaches that can distinguish malicious agent actions from legitimate ones—without a formal behavioral specification and without generating prohibitive false positive rates—is an open challenge. Approaches based on anomaly detection over action sequences, behavioral fingerprinting of known-good Skill executions, and LLM-based intent classification of agent actions have been proposed but not validated at scale. 

C4: Supply Chain Integrity at Scale. Current cryptographic supply chain security frameworks, such as in-toto [ 35 ] and sigstore, provide provenance verification for compiled artifacts but do not address the specific properties of natural language instruction files. A Skill whose SKILL.md is cryptographically signed is not thereby safe: the signature verifies authorship but not behavioral intent. Extending supply chain integrity frameworks to cover the semantic properties of natural language Skill content—not just the syntactic integrity of the file—requires new verification primi-tives that do not yet exist. This challenge is compounded by the open contribution model of Agent Skills marketplaces, in which the volume of submissions makes manual review at scale impractical. 

C5: Trust Propagation in Multi-Agent Systems. The prompt infection scenario (T7.1) is a specific instance of a broader open problem: how should trust be propagated across agent boundaries in multi-agent systems? When an orchestrator agent delegates a subtask to a subagent, what authority should the subagent inherit? When a subagent returns a result to the orchestrator, how should the orchestrator evaluate the trustworthiness of that result? These questions do not have answers in the current agent security literature, and the Agent Skills framework provides no guidance. Formalizing a trust propagation model for multi-agent systems that is both secure and operationally practical is an open research challenge with implications beyond Agent Skills. 

C6: Automated Skill Vetting. Marketplace-scale security review of Agent Skills requires automated vetting tools that can assess the security properties of a Skill without requiring man-ual inspection of every submission. Existing tools such as Snyk’s agent-scan [ 36 ] and Cisco’s skill-scanner [ 37 ] provide heuristic detection of known-bad patterns, but they do not address the fundamental challenge of detecting novel attack techniques expressed in natural language. Devel-oping automated vetting pipelines that combine static analysis of bundled scripts, semantic analysis of natural language instructions, dynamic analysis of Skill behavior in sandboxed environments, and provenance verification of declared dependencies—while maintaining low false positive rates to avoid blocking legitimate Skills—is an open engineering and research challenge. 

C7: Specification-Level Security Properties. The Agent Skills specification, as currently defined, makes no security guarantees and imposes no security requirements on conforming imple-mentations. Extending the specification to include mandatory capability declarations, dependency pinning requirements, and content integrity mechanisms would enable the ecosystem to enforce baseline security properties across all compliant agent runtimes. However, specification design for security is a non-trivial problem: requirements that are too prescriptive may limit the expressive-ness of Skills, while requirements that are too permissive fail to meaningfully constrain the attack surface. The challenge of designing a security-aware Agent Skills specification that preserves the  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:23

framework’s flexibility while providing meaningful security properties is an open problem that requires engagement from the security research community, the agent platform developers, and the Skill author community. 

7.3 Recommendations 

The findings of this analysis carry practical implications for the four principal stakeholder groups in the Agent Skills ecosystem. 

For Skill authors. Authors should treat SKILL.md files with the same security discipline applied to code. Bundled scripts should declare pinned dependencies with version-locked lockfiles, and any external URLs referenced in instructions should be validated against an explicit allowlist. Authors should avoid instructions that direct agents to read files or make network requests beyond the declared scope of the Skill, and should document the full set of filesystem and network operations the Skill may perform to enable users to make informed installation decisions. 

For marketplace operators. Marketplace operators should implement mandatory security review pipelines that combine static analysis of bundled scripts, semantic analysis of SKILL.md instructions for injection patterns and overbroad capability claims, and provenance verification of declared dependencies. Namespace governance mechanisms—enforcing uniqueness constraints and binding namespaces to verified publisher identities—are necessary to prevent typosquatting at scale. Reputation systems should implement anomaly detection for coordinated inflation patterns and should weight verified installation outcomes over raw download metrics. 

For agent platform developers. Platform developers should extend the Agent Skills specifica-tion to mandate typed capability declarations, require dependency pinning in bundled scripts, and implement version-bound trust grants that cryptographically bind the trust relationship to a specific content hash of the Skill at installation time. Runtime sandboxing of bundled script execution—with explicit capability grants for filesystem access, network access, and subprocess invocation—should be a baseline requirement rather than an optional feature. Memory and configuration modifications should require explicit user confirmation and be logged to a tamper-evident audit trail. 

For enterprise users. Enterprise users deploying Agent Skills in production environments should treat Skill installation as a software dependency management problem, applying the same governance processes used for open source package adoption: inventory tracking, security review before installation, ongoing monitoring for content changes, and incident response procedures for detected compromise. Purpose-built behavioral monitoring that observes agent network activity and filesystem access patterns, alerting on behavior inconsistent with the active Skill’s declared purpose, should be considered a baseline operational requirement in environments where agents have access to sensitive codebases or credentials. 

8 Related Work 

The architectural properties of Agent Skills, analyzed in Section 3, give rise to a threat landscape that existing security research has addressed only partially. We survey the related work and identify the gap each leaves with respect to Agent Skills security. 

LLM Adversarial Robustness. A large body of work studies the vulnerability of language models to adversarial inputs, including jailbreaks that elicit policy-violating outputs [ 38 –41 ], prompt injection attacks that hijack model behavior through adversarial instructions [ 42 , 43 ], and model extraction and membership inference attacks targeting the underlying weights [ 44 ]. This line of work treats the model as the primary attack surface and focuses on perturbations to model inputs or training data. The threats we identify in this paper arise from the extension mechanism rather than from the model itself, and the attacker model encompasses actors who control Skill content rather than actors who craft adversarial inputs. LLM robustness techniques therefore offer limited  

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:24 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo

transferability to the Agent Skills setting, as they do not address trust establishment, permission scoping, or supply chain compromise. 

Extension Ecosystem Security. Browser extensions and IDE plugins share Agent Skills’ community-contribution, dynamic-loading, and broad-permission profile. Research on Chrome extensions has identified large-scale malicious and overprivileged extension populations [ 31 , 45 ], and analogous work on VS Code extensions has found widespread suspicious behavior patterns [ 46 ]. Plugin review processes have been studied in the browser extension context, revealing systematic limitations of human-review-based vetting at scale [ 31 ]. Agent Skills inherits these problems and adds the dimension of natural language instruction delivery: unlike code-based extensions that can be statically analyzed for API calls and permission usage, a Skill’s behavioral specification is written in natural language and interpreted dynamically by a language model, making static analysis of the full behavioral envelope fundamentally harder. 

Software Supply Chain Security. Software supply chain attacks have become a major threat vector, with package repository compromises delivering malware to large downstream popula-tions [ 22 , 47 ]. The SolarWinds [ 48 ], XZ Utils [ 49 ], and analogous incidents have driven extensive research on malicious package detection [ 47 ], dependency confusion [ 50 ], and cryptographic prove-nance verification frameworks [ 35 ]. Agent Skills marketplaces exhibit the core properties that make package repositories vulnerable—open submission, automated distribution, and large consumer populations—with the additional complication that malicious payload delivery does not require compromising a compiled binary or injecting executable code: a single adversarial sentence in a SKILL.md file is sufficient to redirect agent behavior at operator privilege level. Unlike binary supply chain attacks, which can in principle be detected through cryptographic integrity checks on compiled artifacts, the behavioral effects of a malicious SKILL.md are indistinguishable from benign instruction drift without a ground-truth specification of intended agent behavior. The real-world ClawHavoc campaign [10, 11] confirms that this attack surface is actively exploited at scale. 

LLM-based Agent Security. A growing body of work addresses security threats specific to LLM-based agents. At the survey level, Gan et al. provide a comprehensive taxonomy of security, privacy, and ethics threats organized around threat sources and impacts [ 51 ]; He et al. catalog security and privacy issues with case studies across representative deployments [ 52 ]; Yu et al. survey threats and countermeasures with particular attention to multi-agent trust dynamics [ 34 ]; and Datta et al. offer a broad treatment covering evaluation methodologies and open challenges [ 53 ]. At the attack level, prompt injection represents the most studied threat vector. Greshake et al. [ 25 ] introduced indirect prompt injection, demonstrating that adversarial instructions embedded in external content retrieved by an agent can hijack its behavior; subsequent work has formalized attack taxonomies, developed benchmarks [ 54 –56 ], and characterized the difficulty of robust mitigation under adaptive attackers [ 55 ]. Defenses have explored both training-based and inference-time approaches, including structured query formats [ 32 ] and privilege-based instruction hierarchies [ 33 ]. Beyond prompt injection, Chen et al. introduced AgentPoison, targeting RAG-based agents by poisoning their long-term memory [ 29 ], and Yang et al. formalized agent backdoor attacks embeddable through data poisoning or weight manipulation [ 57 ]. The MCP security analysis of Hou et al. [ 4 ] is the closest prior work to the present paper, identifying nine threat categories across the MCP lifecycle. However, Agent Skills introduces architectural properties that have no MCP counterpart: the natural language instruction carrier, the absence of a typed interface contract, and the single-approval persistent trust model. Critically, existing prompt injection defenses that rely on privilege boundaries between the operator and user layers [ 32 , 33 ] are architecturally inapplicable to Agent Skills, where a malicious 

SKILL.md operates at operator level by design and is structurally indistinguishable from legitimate Skill content. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work provides a systematic security analysis of the Agent Skills framework specifically. 

> J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.

Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:25 

9 Conclusion 

This paper presents the first systematic security analysis of Agent Skills. We decompose the frame-work’s attack surface across a four-phase lifecycle, construct a threat taxonomy comprising seven categories and seventeen scenarios grounded in real-world evidence, and analyze five confirmed incidents that validate the taxonomy’s coverage. Our analysis reveals that the most severe threats in the Agent Skills ecosystem are not addressable through incremental mitigations: prompt injection resists detection without a formal behavioral specification that does not exist, the consent gap requires architectural reform to the trust model, and supply chain integrity cannot be ensured through syntactic artifact signing alone. As natural language capability specification becomes the dominant paradigm in agentic AI, we hope this work provides a foundation for the security research and engineering effort that safe broad deployment will require. 

References 

[1] Z. Xi, W. Chen, X. Guo, W. He, Y. Ding, B. Hong, M. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Jin, E. Zhou et al. , “The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey,” Science China Information Sciences , vol. 68, no. 2, p. 121101, 2025. [2] L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Tang, X. Chen, Y. Lin et al. , “A survey on large language model based autonomous agents,” Frontiers of Computer Science , vol. 18, no. 6, p. 186345, 2024. [3] OpenAI, “ChatGPT plugins,” https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt-plugins, 2023. [4] X. Hou, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, and H. Wang, “Model context protocol (mcp): Landscape, security threats, and future research directions,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology , 2025. [5] Anthropic, “Agent Skills: Claude code documentation,” https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code/skills, 2025. [6] Cursor, “Agent Skills | Cursor docs,” https://cursor.com/docs/context/skills, 2025. [7] GitHub, “About agent Skills — GitHub Copilot documentation,” https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/concepts/agents/ about-agent-skills, 2025. [8] Google, “Agent Skills | Gemini CLI documentation,” https://geminicli.com/docs/cli/skills/, 2026. [9] I. Cherny, “Cato CTRL threat research: From productivity boost to ransomware nightmare — weaponizing Claude Skills with MedusaLocker,” https://www.catonetworks.com/blog/cato-ctrl-weaponizing-claude-skills-with-medusalocker/, 2025. [10] Y. Liu, Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, G. Deng, Y. Li, J. Ning, and L. Y. Zhang, “Malicious agent skills in the wild: A large-scale security empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.06547 , 2026. [11] Snyk Security Research, “Snyk finds prompt injection in 36 [12] Y. Liu, W. Wang, R. Feng, Y. Zhang, G. Xu, G. Deng, Y. Li, and L. Zhang, “Agent skills in the wild: An empirical study of security vulnerabilities at scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.10338 , 2026. [13] D. Schmotz, S. Abdelnabi, and M. Andriushchenko, “Agent skills enable a new class of realistic and trivially simple prompt injections,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26328 , 2025. [14] D. Schmotz, L. Beurer-Kellner, S. Abdelnabi, and M. Andriushchenko, “Skill-inject: Measuring agent vulnerability to skill file attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20156 , 2026. [15] Anthropic, “Use skills in claude,” https://support.claude.com/en/articles/12512180-use-skills-in-claude, 2025. [16] CustomGPT, “ChatGPT plugin review: Lessons learned,” https://customgpt.ai/chatgpt-plugin-review/, 2023. [17] DataCamp, “ChatGPT plugins are no more,” https://www.datacamp.com/blog/best-chat-gpt-plugins, 2024. [18] Anthropic, “Introducing the model context protocol,” https://www.anthropic.com/news/model-context-protocol, 2024. [19] Mitiga Labs, “AI agent supply chain risk: Silent codebase exfiltration via skills,” https://www.mitiga.io/blog/ai-agent-supply-chain-risk-silent-codebase-exfiltration-via-skills, 2026. [20] Authmind, “OpenClaw’s 230 malicious skills: What agentic AI supply chains teach us about the need to evolve identity security,” https://www.authmind.com/blogs/openclaw-malicious-skills-agentic-ai-supply-chain, 2026. [21] SafeDep Team, “Agent skills threat model,” https://safedep.io/agent-skills-threat-model, 2026. [22] P. Ladisa, H. Plate, M. Martinez, and O. Barais, “Sok: Taxonomy of attacks on open-source software supply chains,” in 

2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 1509–1526. [23] Aikido Security, “Agent skills spreading hallucinated npx commands,” https://www.aikido.dev/blog/agent-skills-spreading-hallucinated-npx-commands, 2026. [24] OWASP GenAI Security Project, “OWASP top 10 for LLM apps & gen AI agentic security initiative,” https://genai. owasp.org/resource/owasp-top-10-for-agentic-applications-for-2026/, 2025. [25] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz, “Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world llm-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM workshop on 

J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. 111:26 Zhiyuan Li, Jingzheng Wu, Xiang Ling, Xing Cui, and Tianyue Luo 

artificial intelligence and security , 2023, pp. 79–90. [26] Red Hat Developer, “Agent skills: Explore security threats and controls,” https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2026/ 03/10/agent-skills-explore-security-threats-and-controls, 2026. [27] Cisco AI Defense, “Skill scanner: Security analysis of AI agent skills,” https://github.com/cisco-ai-defense/skill-scanner, 2026. [28] A. Donenfeld and O. Vanunu, “Caught in the hook: RCE and API token exfiltration through Claude Code project files,” https://research.checkpoint.com/2026/rce-and-api-token-exfiltration-through-claude-code-project-files-cve-2025-59536/, 2026. [29] Z. Chen, Z. Xiang, C. Xiao, D. Song, and B. Li, “Agentpoison: Red-teaming llm agents via poisoning memory or knowledge bases,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 130 185–130 213, 2024. [30] D. Lee and M. Tiwari, “Prompt infection: Llm-to-llm prompt injection within multi-agent systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07283 , 2024. [31] N. Jagpal, E. Dingle, J.-P. Gravel, P. Mavrommatis, N. Provos, M. A. Rajab, and K. Thomas, “Trends and lessons from three years fighting malicious extensions,” in 24th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 15) , 2015, pp. 579–593. [32] S. Chen, J. Piet, C. Sitawarin, and D. Wagner, “ {StruQ }: Defending against prompt injection with structured queries,” in 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) , 2025, pp. 2383–2400. [33] E. Wallace, K. Xiao, R. Leike, L. Weng, J. Heidecke, and A. Beutel, “The instruction hierarchy: Training llms to prioritize privileged instructions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13208 , 2024. [34] M. Yu, F. Meng, X. Zhou, S. Wang, J. Mao, L. Pan, T. Chen, K. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zhang et al. , “A survey on trustworthy llm agents: Threats and countermeasures,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 2 , 2025, pp. 6216–6226. [35] S. Torres-Arias, H. Afzali, T. K. Kuppusamy, R. Curtmola, and J. Cappos, “in-toto: Providing farm-to-table guarantees for bits and bytes,” in 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19) , 2019, pp. 1393–1410. [36] Snyk, “Snyk Agent Scan: Security scanner for AI agents, MCP servers and agent skills,” https://github.com/snyk/agent-scan, 2026. [37] Cisco AI Defense, “Skill scanner: Security scanner for agent skills,” https://github.com/cisco-ai-defense/skill-scanner, 2026. [38] A. Wei, N. Haghtalab, and J. Steinhardt, “Jailbroken: How does llm safety training fail?” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 36, pp. 80 079–80 110, 2023. [39] A. Zou, Z. Wang, N. Carlini, M. Nasr, J. Z. Kolter, and M. Fredrikson, “Universal and transferable adversarial attacks on aligned language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043 , 2023. [40] P. Chao, A. Robey, E. Dobriban, H. Hassani, G. J. Pappas, and E. Wong, “Jailbreaking black box large language models in twenty queries,” in 2025 IEEE Conference on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 23–42. [41] A. Mehrotra, M. Zampetakis, P. Kassianik, B. Nelson, H. Anderson, Y. Singer, and A. Karbasi, “Tree of attacks: Jailbreaking black-box llms automatically,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 61 065–61 105, 2024. [42] F. Perez and I. Ribeiro, “Ignore previous prompt: Attack techniques for language models,” in NeurIPS ML Safety Workshop , 2022. [43] Y. Jia, Y. Liu, Z. Shao, J. Jia, and N. Gong, “Promptlocate: Localizing prompt injection attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12252 , 2025. [44] N. Carlini, F. Tramer, E. Wallace, M. Jagielski, A. Herbert-Voss, K. Lee, A. Roberts, T. Brown, D. Song, U. Erlingsson 

et al. , “Extracting training data from large language models,” in 30th USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 21) ,2021, pp. 2633–2650. [45] A. Kapravelos, C. Grier, N. Chachra, C. Kruegel, G. Vigna, and V. Paxson, “Hulk: Eliciting malicious behavior in browser extensions,” in 23rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 14) , 2014, pp. 641–654. [46] S. Edirimannage, C. Elvitigala, A. K. K. Don, W. Daluwatta, P. Wijesekara, and I. Khalil, “Developers are victims too: A comprehensive analysis of the vs code extension ecosystem,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.07479 , 2024. [47] M. Ohm, H. Plate, A. Sykosch, and M. Meier, “Backstabber’s knife collection: A review of open source software supply chain attacks,” in International Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment .Springer, 2020, pp. 23–43. [48] Mandiant, “Highly evasive attacker leverages solarwinds supply chain to compromise multiple global victims with SUN-BURST backdoor,” https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/threat-intelligence/evasive-attacker-leverages-solarwinds-supply-chain-compromises-with-sunburst-backdoor, dec 2020. [49] A. Freund, “backdoor in upstream xz/liblzma leading to ssh server compromise,” https://www.openwall.com/lists/oss-security/2024/03/29/4, mar 2024. [50] A. Birsan, “Dependency confusion: How I hacked into Apple, Microsoft and dozens of other companies,” Medium , 2021. [51] Y. Gan, Y. Yang, Z. Ma, P. He, R. Zeng, Y. Wang, Q. Li, C. Zhou, S. Li, T. Wang et al. , “Navigating the risks: A survey of security, privacy, and ethics threats in llm-based agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.09523 , 2024. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026. Towards Secure Agent Skills: Architecture, Threat Taxonomy, and Security Analysis 111:27 

[52] F. He, T. Zhu, D. Ye, B. Liu, W. Zhou, and P. S. Yu, “The emerged security and privacy of llm agent: A survey with case studies,” ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1–36, 2025. [53] S. Datta, S. K. Nahin, A. Chhabra, and P. Mohapatra, “Agentic ai security: Threats, defenses, evaluation, and open challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23883 , 2025. [54] Q. Zhan, Z. Liang, Z. Ying, and D. Kang, “Injecagent: Benchmarking indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , 2024, pp. 10 471–10 506. [55] Y. Liu, Y. Jia, R. Geng, J. Jia, and N. Z. Gong, “Formalizing and benchmarking prompt injection attacks and defenses,” in 

33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) , 2024, pp. 1831–1847. [56] E. Debenedetti, J. Zhang, M. Balunovic, L. Beurer-Kellner, M. Fischer, and F. Tramèr, “Agentdojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate prompt injection attacks and defenses for llm agents,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 37, pp. 82 895–82 920, 2024. [57] W. Yang, X. Bi, Y. Lin, S. Chen, J. Zhou, and X. Sun, “Watch out for your agents! investigating backdoor threats to llm-based agents,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 100 938–100 964, 2024. J. ACM, Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.