Title: Penny Wise, Pixel Foolish: Bypassing Price Constraints in Multimodal Agents via Visual Adversarial Perturbations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.16515v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 00:11:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# “Penny Wise, Pixel Foolish”: Bypassing Price Constraints in Multimodal Agents via Visual Adversarial Perturbations 

Jiachen Qian 

City University of Hong Kong 

72510756@cityu-dg.edu.cn 

Zhaolu Kang 

Peking University 

zlkang25@stu.pku.edu.cn 

Abstract 

The rapid proliferation of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) has ushered in the era of the “Agentic Economy,” where Mo-bile Agents autonomously execute high-stakes financial transactions. While these agents demonstrate impressive operational capabili-ties, their adversarial robustness remains a glar-ing blind spot. In this paper, we identify a systemic vulnerability termed Visual Domi-nance Hallucination (VDH) , where imper-ceptible adversarial visual cues can act as a “super-stimulus,” overriding textual price evi-dence in our evaluated screenshot-based price-constrained settings and forcing the agent into irrational economic decisions. We propose 

PriceBlind , a stealthy, white-box adversarial at-tack framework for controlled screenshot-based evaluation. Unlike prior works that rely on con-spicuous artifacts like pop-ups, PriceBlind ex-ploits the modality gap in CLIP-based encoders via a novel Semantic-Decoupling Loss . Rather than literally making a luxury item “look cheap,” this regularizer weakens the consis-tency between high-price text and visual value cues by aligning the image embedding with a low-cost/value-associated anchor region while preserving pixel-level fidelity. On our main 

E-ShopBench benchmark with clear price con-straints, screenshot-based white-box evalua-tion yields ASRs around 80% on the evalu-ated agents. Under the evaluated single-turn coordinate-selection protocol in a simplified layout-aware setting, our Ensemble-DI-FGSM 

strategy also yields non-trivial black-box trans-fer, with ASR roughly 35–41% across GPT-4o, Gemini-1.5-Pro, and Claude-3.5-Sonnet. In the same screenshot-based setting, standard robust encoders reduce ASR only partially, while a Verify-then-Act stack with robust encoders low-ers ASR to below 10% at some clean-accuracy cost. 

1 Introduction 

The transition from passive chatbots to active Mo-bile Agents has been catalyzed by rapid MLLM progress, including influential preprint reports (OpenAI, 2023; Bai et al., 2023). Frameworks such as AppAgent (Zhang et al., 2025a) and Mobile-Agent-v2 (Wang et al., 2024) can now perceive dynamic smartphone User Interfaces (UIs) via screenshots and execute sequential actions (e.g., tap, swipe) to fulfill complex user instructions. E-commerce represents a critical application domain where users delegate financial decisions—such as 

“find a coffee machine under $50 with the best rat-ings” —to these autonomous systems. As agents transition from information retrieval to executing financial transactions, the security stakes increase exponentially. A hallucination in a chat is a nuisance; a hallucination in a transaction is potential theft. While robustness against textual prompt injection has been studied, the visual chan-nel remains a wide-open attack surface. Existing research predominantly focuses on "Jailbreaking" for safety violation (Qi et al., 2024), but few ex-plore Goal Hijacking in utility-oriented tasks. The economic incentive for such attacks is clear: mali-cious merchants could subtly manipulate product images to trick autonomous agents into purchasing higher-margin items. Consider a scenario where a user explicitly in-structs an agent to "buy the cheapest option." The agent must perform multi-hop reasoning: (1) lo-calize all items, (2) read their prices via OCR, (3) compare the numerical values, and (4) click the item with the minimum value. Current agents rely on a "Trust Assumption," presuming that the vi-sual features of an item are semantically consis-tent with its metadata. We challenge this assump-tion. We hypothesize that current MLLMs exhibit a Visual Dominance Hallucination (VDH) pat-tern. Even when OCR correctly extracts text (e.g., 

> arXiv:2604.16515v1 [cs.CV] 15 Apr 2026 Figure 1: Illustrative schematic of the “Penny Wise, Pixel Foolish” phenomenon. (Left) Benign scenario: the agent adheres to the textual price constraint. (Right) PriceBlind attack: under imperceptible adversarial per-turbations, the agent prioritizes manipulated visual se-mantics over explicit OCR text, leading to selection of the expensive target item.

“$500”), strong adversarial visual signals can act as a “super-stimulus,” causing the attention mecha-nism to down-weight the textual tokens in favor of the manipulated visual embedding. In this paper, we introduce PriceBlind , an adver-sarial framework designed to exploit this bias. Un-like Visual Contextual Attacks (Miao et al., 2025) that aim for toxic output, PriceBlind aims to induce erroneous item selection in financial scenarios. Our contributions are fourfold: 1. Mechanistic Insight: We identify Visual Dominance Hallucination , a phenomenon where MLLMs prioritize manipulated visual semantics over explicit OCR evidence in con-flicting scenarios, and provide a heuristic cross-attention account of how visual cues can compete with textual price evidence. 2. Methodological Innovation: We propose the PriceBlind framework, featuring a Semantic-Decoupling Loss and an Ensemble-DI-FGSM 

strategy for black-box transferability. 3. Comprehensive Evaluation: On our main E-ShopBench benchmark (200 scenarios) with clear price constraints, PriceBlind demon-strates strong effectiveness in screenshot-based white-box settings (around 80% ASR on Mobile-Agent-v2 and AppAgent) and non-trivial transfer to black-box models un-der a single-turn coordinate-selection proto-col (roughly 35 –41% ASR across GPT-4o, Gemini-1.5-Pro, and Claude-3.5-Sonnet). 4. Defense Analysis: In the same screenshot-based setting, we evaluate recent defenses including Robust-CLIP (Schlarmann et al., 2024) and AdPO (Liu et al., 2025a), showing partial mitigation from robust encoders and substantially stronger reduction from Verify-then-Act with robust encoders. 

2 Related Work 

MLLM-based Mobile Agents. Recent works have extended MLLMs to interact with mobile GUIs. Mobile-Agent (Wang et al., 2024) lever-ages visual perception tools to localize icons and text. AppAgent (Zhang et al., 2025a) employs a learning-by-demonstration approach. Other frame-works like Auto-Droid (Wen et al., 2024) and 

Coco-Agent (Ma et al., 2024) focus on improv-ing planning efficiency. Despite their utility, these frameworks generally operate under a Trust As-sumption , presuming the visual fidelity of the UI is uncompromised. 

Adversarial Attacks on Multimodal Models. 

The field has moved rapidly from static image at-tacks to agent-based attacks. Classic adversarial-example work showed that small perturbations can induce large failures in vision models and motivated both robust training and transfer at-tacks (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2018; Eykholt et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019). Early works like Visual Adversarial Exam-ples (Qi et al., 2024) focused on causing random classification errors or jailbreaking safety filters. Wu et al. (2025) presented VisualWebArena-Adv ,demonstrating that web agents are brittle to visual perturbations. Zhang et al. (2025b) introduced pop-up attacks to distract agents. Recent work on trans-fer attacks has shown promising results: Zhang et al. (2024) demonstrated adversarial illusions in multi-modal embeddings, and the X-Transfer at-tack (Huang et al., 2025) achieves “super transfer-ability” through surrogate scaling. PriceBlind dif-fers by being a stealthy content modification attack specifically targeting economic decision-making. 

Environmental Injection and GUI Agent At-tacks. Recent preprint studies report rapid progress in this area: AgentHazard (Liu et al., 2025b) investigates mobile GUI agent vulnerabil-ities, GhostEI-Bench (Chen et al., 2025) exam-ines performance across critical risk scenarios, and 

Chameleon (Zhang et al., 2025c) reports up to 84.5% ASR through iterative optimization. Unlike these environmental injection approaches, Price-Blind perturbs only the product-image pixels. This makes the manipulation content-only and visually subtle, although our evaluation remains a simpli-fied screenshot-conditioned, layout-aware setting rather than a live end-to-end deployment. 

Defenses for Vision-Language Models. Robust-CLIP (Schlarmann et al., 2024) proposes unsuper-vised adversarial fine-tuning of vision embeddings. 

AdPO (Liu et al., 2025a) is a recent preprint that introduces adversarial defense through preference optimization. FARE (Jovanovi´ c et al., 2023) pro-vides provably fair representation learning. We evaluate PriceBlind against these representative re-cent defenses in Section 4.7. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Preliminaries 

Let St ∈ RH×W ×3 denote the evaluation screen-shot observed by the agent at decision step t, and let 

T denote the textual instruction. An MLLM-based agent πθ(a|St, T ) maps the multimodal input to a probability distribution over the action space A.The visual perception module typically consists of a visual encoder Ev (e.g., CLIP-ViT (Radford et al., 2021)) that projects St into a latent embedding 

zv = Ev(St).

3.2 Problem Formulation 

Let vtarget be the pixel region of a high-priced item and vcheap be the region of the low-priced item. The user instruction is Tuser = “Buy cheapest” .Let ˜St = St(vtarget + δ) denote the perturbed screenshot obtained by replacing the target item region in St with the perturbed patch vtarget + δ.The adversarial objective is to find a perturbation 

δ applied to vtarget such that the agent performs a click action on the target: 

argmax 

> a

M

 ˜St, T user 



= Click( vtarget )

(1) Subject to the perceptual constraint || δ|| ∞ <ϵ, where ϵ is the perturbation budget (typically 

8/255 ). 

3.3 Threat Model 

We study a simplified screenshot-conditioned threat model for e-commerce benchmarking: • Attacker Goal: Increase sales of a specific high-margin product by tricking autonomous agents into purchasing it despite not meet-ing user’s criteria within the evaluated bench-mark. • Attacker Capability: The attacker is a mer-chant who can upload product images to the platform. They have full control over their own product image but cannot modify the plat-form’s UI code or competitors’ images. • Layout / Observation Assumption: To op-timize coordinate tokens, the attacker ad-ditionally assumes access to the evaluation screenshot, a stable UI template, or equiva-lent layout-aware target-location information. Thus, our formal setting is stronger than pure offline merchant upload and should be read as a controlled benchmark threat model rather than a universal live-deployment claim. • Knowledge: white-box access to open-source surrogate models but treats the victim’s de-ployment model as a black-box API (“grey-box” setting). 

3.4 The PriceBlind Framework 

To ensure high transferability under the eval-uated single-turn coordinate-selection protocol, we employ an Ensemble Strategy . We opti-mize δ against a set of surrogate models M =

{Qwen-VL , LLaVA-1.6 }:

δ∗ = argmin δ(Laction + λLdec ) (2) 

Action-Targeted Loss ( Laction ). This loss en-sures the agent generates the correct coordinate to-kens for the target item in the evaluated screenshot-conditioned protocol. Using the perturbed screen-shot ˜St, we minimize the Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) of the target action tokens: 

Laction (δ) = − X

> m∈M

wm log Pm(ytarget 

|E (m) 

> v

( ˜St), T user )

(3) 

Semantic Decoupling Regularizer ( Ldec ). Anaive attack using only Laction often fails because the agent reads the price text via OCR. We con-struct a Visual Anchor Bank Acheap consisting of embeddings of K = 500 generic low-cost items. For each surrogate encoder m, we compute an encoder-specific centroid ¯e(m) 

> cheap

from the shared Figure 2: Schematic of the PriceBlind framework. We employ an Ensemble-DI-FGSM strategy attacking multiple open-source surrogates. A key component is the Semantic Decoupling Regularizer (Ldec ), which nudges the target-item embedding towards pre-computed low-cost anchor centroids in the surrogate visual embedding spaces. 

anchor bank. The Semantic Decoupling Loss mini-mizes the cosine distance between the adversarial item’s embedding and these low-cost anchor cen-troids: 

e(m) 

> adv

=E(m) 

> v

(vtarget + δ),e(m) 

> orig

=E(m) 

> v

(vtarget ),

Ldec (δ) = X

> m∈M



1 − cos( e(m) 

> adv

, ¯e(m)

> cheap

)+ β · cos( e(m) 

> adv

, e (m)

> orig

)



(4) This creates a “Semantic Camouflage” effect by reducing the consistency between luxury-item vi-sual cues and high-price text, nudging the represen-tation toward a low-cost/value-associated anchor region while preserving pixel-level similarity. 

3.5 Heuristic Analysis: Cross-Attention Dynamics 

We provide a heuristic approximation of why visual perturbations can compete with textual constraints. In the cross-attention layer, the output for a query token q is: Attn (q, K, V) = softmax 

 qKT

√d



V (5) 

Proposition 1 (Fixed-Normalizer Attention Ratio). Let k(1)  

> v

= k(0)  

> v

+ ∆ v denote the perturbed visual key. Under a fixed-normalizer approxima-tion Z(1) ≈ Z(0) , the perturbed and clean visual attention weights satisfy: 

w(1) 

> v

w(0) 

> v

≈ exp 

 q · ∆v

√d



(6) 

Corollary 1. If the corresponding textual at-tention term is approximately unchanged, then a sufficient condition for visual attention to dominate textual attention ( w(1)  

> v

> w (1)  

> t

) is: 

q · ∆v > √d · log w(0) 

> t

w(0) 

> v

!

(7) This condition is more likely when w(0)  

> t

/w (0) 

> v

is moderate (typically 0.5-2.0 in our experiments). The approximation is intended as intuition rather than a tight bound for full multi-layer MLLMs. Our semantic decoupling loss is designed to en-courage movement along such value-associated di-rections. A fuller heuristic derivation is provided in Appendix A. 

3.6 Algorithm: Ensemble-DI-FGSM 

We adopt the Diverse Input (DI) and Momentum It-erative (MI) strategies to boost transferability. The update rule follows momentum-iterative gradient accumulation: 

gi+1 = μ · gi + ∇δL(δi)

||∇ δL(δi)|| 1

(8) Algorithm 1 PriceBlind Attack Generation 

Require: Surrogate Models M , Screenshot St,Target Region vtarget , Text Tuser , Budget ϵ,Iterations N , Momentum μ 

> 1:

Initialize δ0 ∼ U (−ϵ, ϵ ), g0 = 0  

> 2:

Compute encoder-specific centroids ¯e(m)

> cheap

from Anchor Bank Acheap  

> 3:

for i = 0 to N − 1 do  

> 4:

Form perturbed screenshot ˜S(i) 

> t

=

St(vtarget + δi) 

> 5:

Apply Diverse Input transform: ˆS(i) 

> t

=

ResizePad ( ˜S(i) 

> t

, p = 0 .5)  

> 6:

Compute Laction on ˆS(i) 

> t

and Ldec on 

vtarget + δi 

> 7:

Set L = Laction + λLdec and back-propagate to obtain ∇δL 

> 8:

Update Momentum: gi+1 = μ · gi + ∇δ L||∇ δ L|| 1 

> 9:

Update Perturbation: δi+1 = Clip ϵ(δi − α ·

sign (gi+1 ))  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

return ˜S(N ) 

> t

= St(vtarget + δN )

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

• Dataset (E-ShopBench): 200 adversarial sce-narios across Amazon (80), eBay (60), and Taobao (60). Each scenario contains one tar-get (expensive) and one distractor (cheap) item. • Victim Models: white-box: Mobile-Agent-v2 (Qwen-VL-Chat), AppAgent (LLaVA-1.6-Vicuna-7B). black-box: GPT-4o, Gemini-1.5-Pro, Claude-3.5-Sonnet. • Baselines: clean, Random Noise ( ϵ = 8 /255 ), Typographic (“Best Deal” overlay), Adv. Pop-up (Zhang et al., 2025b). • Metrics: ASR (Attack Success Rate), LPIPS (perceptual similarity). • Statistical Reporting: Scenario-level ASR numbers are reported as descriptive percent-ages; tables use rounded values for readabil-ity, and the prose emphasizes effect sizes and broad trends. We reserve mean ± std style reporting for distributional summaries such as attention weights. 

Metrics and Statistical Reporting. ASR is de-fined as the percentage of evaluation scenarios in 

Table 1: White-box attack performance on E-ShopBench ( ϵ = 8/255 ). Values are descriptive scenario-level ASR percentages, rounded for readabil-ity. 

Method Victim Agent ASR (%) ↑

clean Mobile-Agent-v2 4Random Noise Mobile-Agent-v2 7Typographic Mobile-Agent-v2 32 Adv. Pop-up Mobile-Agent-v2 45 

PriceBlind Mobile-Agent-v2 82 

clean AppAgent 4

PriceBlind AppAgent 79 

Table 2: Black-box transfer ASR (%) on proprietary models under the single-turn coordinate-selection pro-tocol (E-ShopBench, n = 200 scenarios). Values are descriptive and rounded for readability.                   

> Method GPT-4o Gemini-1.5-Pro Claude-3.5
> clean 222Typographic 19 15 13 Adv. Pop-up 22 20 18 PriceBlind (Single) 13 11 9PriceBlind (Ensemble) 41 39 35

which the agent selects the pre-defined expensive target item (scenario-level). Unless otherwise spec-ified, scenario-level ASR values should be read as descriptive summaries over E-ShopBench rather than formal inferential estimates. Results reported with ± in this paper denote mean ± std for under-lying continuous or token-level measurements, not 95% confidence intervals. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 1 reports white-box ASR on E-ShopBench. PriceBlind substantially degrades price-constrained decision-making in white-box settings. On Mobile-Agent-v2, PriceBlind reaches 82% 

ASR, compared with 32% for Typographic and 

45% for Adv. Pop-up. On AppAgent, PriceBlind reaches 79% while the clean condition remains at 

4% . These are descriptive scenario-level results on the main E-ShopBench screenshot-based benchmark and serve as the paper’s central white-box empirical claim. 

4.3 Black-box Transferability Results 

Table 2 presents results on black-box proprietary models. Under the single-turn coordinate-selection pro-tocol, the ensemble strategy substantially improves black-box transfer. In Table 2, “PriceBlind (Sin-gle)” denotes the single-surrogate Qwen-VL set-ting. On GPT-4o, ASR rises from 13% for this single-surrogate setup to 41% for the ensemble; on Gemini-1.5-Pro, from 11% to 39% ; and on Claude-3.5, from 9% to 35% . These black-box numbers should be interpreted as simplified protocol results rather than end-to-end multi-turn agent execution. Together with Table 1, they define the paper’s main benchmark evidence; the appendix prompt-style stress tests are supplementary and are not intended as directly comparable replacements. 

4.4 Qualitative Analysis 

As a supplementary, non-systematic qualitative analysis, we manually inspected Chain-of-Thought (CoT) logs from successful attacks and grouped the observed rationales into three descriptive fail-ure patterns. These language-level explanations are post-hoc rationalizations rather than direct obser-vations of the optimized embedding direction, so the patterns below should be interpreted as symp-toms of disrupted price-value association rather than standalone proof of mechanism. The percent-ages below denote descriptive shares within the inspected successful attacks, not benchmark-level ASR values: 

Pattern 1: Visual-Semantic Overriding (45%): The agent acknowledges the high price but still re-frames the item as compatible with a value-oriented choice. For instance: "Although this item is $499, it looks like the basic option or a better-value pack-age." 

Pattern 2: Numerical Blindness (30%): The agent simply ignored the text. When asked to "buy the cheapest", the agent clicked the expensive per-turbed item stating: "This looks like the most basic model." 

Pattern 3: Layout Hallucination (25%): The perturbation caused the agent to misalign the price text, believing a neighbor item’s price belonged to the target item. Taken together, these patterns suggest that the perturbation disrupts price-value association, but they should not be read as evidence that the rep-resentation literally becomes a cheap-item embed-ding. The same visual shift may be rationalized downstream as a basic model, a discounted/bundle interpretation, or a price-layout mismatch.    

> Figure 3: Grad-CAM saliency visualization. In the benign case (Top), the model highlights the OCR price regions. Under PriceBlind attack (Bottom), saliency shifts away from the price text towards the manipulated visual features. Table 3: Attention weight distribution (mean ±std) across token types.

Condition Visual Price Text Other 

clean 0.32 ±0.05 0.28 ±0.04 0.40 ±0.06 

PriceBlind 0.58 ±0.07 0.11 ±0.03 0.31 ±0.05 

Change +81% -61% -22% 

4.5 Attention Weight Analysis 

Figure 3 provides a qualitative Grad-CAM saliency visualization, while the table below reports supple-mentary quantitative evidence from Qwen-VL’s cross-attention layers. Together, they provide descriptive support for the proposed mechanism rather than a second benchmark. 

Supplementary finding: PriceBlind shifts cross-attention mass from price text tokens to vi-sual tokens. Numeric evidence: Visual atten-tion increases from 0.32 ±0.05 to 0.58 ±0.07 (+81%), while price-text attention decreases from 0.28 ±0.04 

to 0.11 ±0.03 (-61%); “Other” tokens drop by 22%. 

Scope caveat: These token-level summaries are descriptive statistics over analyzed trajectories and provide supporting evidence consistent with the mechanism, rather than a standalone causal proof. 

4.6 Ablation Study 

Both Laction and Ldec are necessary, and ensemble training is important for black-box transfer under the single-turn coordinate-selection protocol. On Mobile-Agent-v2, either loss alone remains below 

50% ASR, while the full method reaches about 

80% ; separately, transfer to GPT-4o rises from the Table 4: Ablation on Mobile-Agent-v2 (white-box). ASR values are descriptive and rounded for readability; LPIPS is lower-is-better perceptual distance. 

Configuration ASR (%) LPIPS ↓Laction only 45 0.028 

Ldec only 39 0.031 

Full ( λ = 1 .5) 82 0.033 

w/o Momentum 69 0.031 

w/o DI Transform 71 0.032 

Single Model (Qwen) 76 0.031 

Figure 4: JPEG robustness curves. PriceBlind maintains high ASR even under aggressive JPEG compression and consistently outperforms baselines across the tested JPEG settings. 

low teens for a single surrogate to about 40% for the ensemble. The ablation ASR/LPIPS values are descriptive white-box results on Mobile-Agent-v2, while the GPT-4o transferability numbers come from the simplified single-turn protocol. 

4.7 Defense Evaluation 

Within the main screenshot-based Mobile-Agent-v2 benchmark, robust encoders partially mitigate PriceBlind, while Verify-then-Act provides the strongest reduction. ASR drops from about 82% 

with no defense to about 58% /53% under Robust-CLIP and AdPO, and to the low teens under VtA; combining VtA with Robust-CLIP reduces ASR to below 10% . This stronger verification-heavy stack comes with a clean-accuracy trade-off, which falls into the high-80% range. 

Why Robust Encoders Provide Partial Defense. 

We hypothesize that robust encoders primarily de-fend against perturbations that cause large, arbi-trary embedding shifts. However, PriceBlind’s se-mantic decoupling loss creates perturbations that 

Table 5: Defense results on Mobile-Agent-v2 in the screenshot-based setting. ASR and clean accuracy are descriptive percentages rounded for readability.                 

> Defense PriceBlind ASR Clean Acc.
> None (clean reference) 82 96 JPEG Compression (Q=50) 72 94 Gaussian Blur ( σ=1.0) 68 92 Robust-CLIP (Schlarmann et al., 2024) 58 93 AdPO (Liu et al., 2025a) 53 95 Verify-then-Act (Hard) 12 88 VtA + Robust-CLIP 987

Table 6: Controlled attack comparison on E-ShopBench (ϵ = 8 /255 ). Transfer columns use the single-turn coordinate-selection protocol; values are descriptive ASR (%) rounded for readability.                             

> Method white-box GPT-4o Gemini Stealth
> MI-FGSM 65 18 16 High DI-FGSM 69 22 20 High X-Transfer 76 36 32 High AdvDiffVLM 73 33 30 High Pop-up Attack 45 22 20 Low
> PriceBlind 82 41 39 High

move embeddings within the natural image mani-fold (towards a low-cost/value-associated anchor region), which robust training does not specifi-cally address. This suggests that defending against semantic manipulation attacks may require dif-ferent approaches than defending against random perturbations—specifically, methods that preserve semantic consistency between visual features and associated metadata. 

4.8 Comparison with Related Attack Methods 

We compare PriceBlind with recent transfer attack methods in Table 6. To ensure fair comparison, we re-implemented baseline attacks under controlled conditions on E-ShopBench, following the spirit of reliable robustness evaluation (Croce and Hein, 2020). PriceBlind outperforms all controlled baseline attacks on both white-box and simplified transfer columns. White-box ASR is about 82% versus a strongest baseline in the mid-70% range, and GPT-4o/Gemini transfer reaches about 41% /39% 

versus strongest baselines in the mid-30% and low-

30% ranges. Transfer columns are measured un-der a single-turn coordinate-selection protocol and should not be interpreted as end-to-end multi-turn task completion rates. Table 7: Preliminary transferability probe to alternative encoder architectures. Values are descriptive ASR (%) rounded for readability.            

> Target Encoder ASR (%) ∆vs CLIP
> CLIP-ViT-L/14 (reference) 82 –SigLIP-SO400M 45 −37
> EVA-CLIP-8B 52 −30
> InternViT-6B 39 −43

4.9 Preliminary Probe to Alternative Encoders 

As a limited supplementary probe beyond our main screenshot-based evaluation, we examined transfer-ability to several alternative encoder architectures: In this preliminary probe, transferability de-creases on alternative encoders but remains non-trivial. Relative to the CLIP reference, EVA-CLIP stays above 50% , while SigLIP and InternViT drop to roughly the mid-40% and high-30% range, re-spectively. These values should be read as indica-tive supplementary checks rather than definitive cross-encoder estimates, and not as replacements for the main screenshot-based benchmark. 

4.10 Layer-wise Attention Analysis 

As a supplementary mechanistic probe, we ana-lyzed attention weights across all 32 transformer layers of Qwen-VL. We found that the attention shift is most pronounced in layers 20-28 (the “rea-soning” layers), with Pearson correlation r = 0 .73 

(p < 0.001 , n = 32 layers) between layer depth and attention shift magnitude. Early layers (1-10) show minimal change, suggesting that low-level vi-sual features remain intact while high-level seman-tic interpretation is manipulated. This layer-wise analysis is intended as supporting evidence rather than part of the paper’s central benchmark claim. As supplementary, non-systematic checks be-yond our main screenshot-focused evaluation, Ap-pendix E reports preliminary results for DOM/AX-tree observation settings, and Appendix J summa-rizes prompt-style stress tests that are not intended as directly comparable replacements for the main benchmark. 

5 Discussion 

Root Cause: Dataset Bias in Pre-training. We argue that the root cause of VDH is not just the architecture, but the pre-training data. Datasets like LAION-5B contain massive amounts of noisy image-text pairs where the model learns that "vi-sual appearance" implies "textual attributes". Price-Blind exploits this correlation by nudging the em-bedding toward low-cost/value-associated direc-tions, effectively leveraging the model’s own statis-tical biases against it. 

Novelty Relative to CLIP-Space Attacks. We acknowledge that embedding-space manipulation for VLMs has been explored in prior work. Price-Blind’s contribution is: (1) the identification of VDH as a specific vulnerability pattern in agentic fi-nancial tasks, (2) the semantic decoupling loss that targets price-value associations rather than generic class boundaries, and (3) a broad screenshot-based evaluation on E-ShopBench showing strong vulner-ability in the main clear-constraint benchmark and non-trivial transfer under our evaluated single-turn black-box protocol. 

The Arms Race: Attack vs. Defense. Our work highlights a classic security arms race. While we propose PriceBlind, defenses like separate OCR modules can mitigate it. However, attackers can counter this by attacking the OCR engine itself. This suggests that a static defense is insufficient. Future agent architectures must incorporate dy-namic verification , where the agent actively seeks corroborating evidence when visual and textual sig-nals conflict. 

Implications for Future Agents. The vulnera-bility exposed by PriceBlind suggests that current "Late Fusion" architectures are insufficient for high-stakes decision making. Future agents may need to adopt a "Verify-then-Act" architecture, where critical constraints are verified by specialized, non-neural symbolic modules before the neural planner is allowed to execute an action. Reliance on a sin-gle, monolithic MLLM for both perception and reasoning is a single point of failure. 

Broader Impact on Autonomous Systems. Be-yond e-commerce, the Visual Dominance Halluci-nation vulnerability has significant implications for autonomous systems in healthcare, finance, and critical infrastructure. Medical imaging agents could be manipulated to misinterpret diagnostic images, while financial document processing sys-tems might be deceived about numerical values in contracts or invoices. Our findings suggest that any system where visual perception directly influ-ences high-stakes decisions requires additional ver-ification layers. The fundamental tension between efficiency (single-model inference) and security (multi-modal verification) will shape the design of next-generation autonomous agents. 

Recommendations for Practitioners. Based on our findings, we recommend the following for de-ploying vision-language agents in production: (1) implement redundant verification for price-critical decisions using separate OCR pipelines, (2) estab-lish confidence thresholds that trigger human re-view when visual-textual conflicts are detected, (3) maintain audit logs of agent decisions for post-hoc analysis, and (4) consider ensemble approaches that aggregate predictions from multiple encoder architectures to reduce single-point vulnerabilities. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented PriceBlind , a controlled study of screenshot-based visual vulnerability in e-commerce agents. On our main screenshot-based E-ShopBench benchmark with clear price constraints, we provided evidence that “Visual Dominance” is an important weakness in current MLLMs, allow-ing attackers to override price evidence via stealthy image perturbations in white-box settings. Under the evaluated single-turn coordinate-selection pro-tocol in a simplified layout-aware setting, black-box transfer remains non-trivial, while stronger verification-heavy stacks can substantially reduce risk at some clean-accuracy cost. As agents be-come autonomous economic actors, solving this 

Instruction-Perception Conflict is a prerequisite for robust deployment. Our key findings can be summarized as follows: (1) On our main screenshot-based E-ShopBench benchmark with clear price constraints, Visual Dominance Hallucination yields white-box ASR around 80%; (2) The semantic decoupling loss improves attack effectiveness by disrupting price-value associations in the embedding space; (3) Black-box transfer remains non-trivial (roughly 35–41% ASR) under the evaluated single-turn coordinate-selection protocol; (4) Standard ro-bust encoders reduce ASR only partially, whereas Verify-then-Act combined with robust encoders can reduce ASR to below 10% with clean accuracy in the high-80% range. Looking forward, we believe that the security of autonomous agents will become increasingly crit-ical as these systems handle more financial trans-actions. The community must develop principled approaches to verify agent decisions, particularly when visual and textual signals conflict. We hope that PriceBlind serves as a wake-up call for the development of more robust multimodal architec-tures. 

Limitations 

Benchmark Scale. E-ShopBench contains 200 scenarios, which is modest compared to large-scale benchmarks. Future work should evaluate on larger benchmarks with more diverse UI templates. 

CLIP Encoder Dependency. Our attack is optimized for CLIP-based visual encoders. Our preliminary cross-encoder probe suggests lower transferability on alternative encoders overall, espe-cially on the true non-CLIP encoders SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023) and InternViT, but these supplemen-tary checks are not yet a definitive cross-encoder benchmark. 

Layout-Aware Optimization. Our formal threat model already assumes screenshot-conditioned or stable-layout target coordinates during perturba-tion generation. Broader dynamic UI changes may therefore reduce attack success outside this con-trolled setting. 

Computational Cost. Per-image perturbation requires ∼45 seconds on a single A100 GPU. We did not explore Universal Adversarial Perturbations which could amortize the cost. 

Real-World Deployment Gap. Our evaluation uses simulated e-commerce environments rather than live production systems. Real-world platforms may employ additional security measures, rate lim-iting, or anomaly detection that could affect attack success rates. The gap between controlled experi-ments and real-world deployment remains an im-portant consideration for interpreting our results. 

User Intent Variability. Our main evaluation protocol prioritizes clear price constraints to iso-late instruction-following failures. We additionally report implicit and vague prompt settings as supple-mental stress tests (Appendix J), but those checks are intended to illustrate trend direction rather than serve as directly comparable replacements for the main benchmark figures. Broader real-world intent diversity remains under-explored and may affect observed attack rates. Additional limitations including black-box eval-uation methodology, theoretical analysis scope, and screenshot-centric evaluation scope are discussed in Appendix F. Ethics Statement 

All experiments were conducted in a restricted sandbox environment. No real transactions were ex-ecuted, and no adversarial images were uploaded to live public e-commerce platforms. We believe that responsible disclosure of these vulnerabilities is essential for improving the security of autonomous agents before they are widely deployed in high-stakes financial applications. 

Responsible Disclosure. We encourage the re-search community to use our findings construc-tively to develop more robust multimodal architec-tures rather than for malicious purposes. 

Broader Implications. The proliferation of au-tonomous agents in financial transactions raises fundamental questions about accountability and trust. Our work highlights the need for regula-tory frameworks governing autonomous economic actors. We hope our findings contribute to the de-velopment of safer AI systems. 

Acknowledgements 

Generative AI tools were used to assist with lan-guage polishing and to draft parts of the experimen-tal code. All scientific content, code, and results were reviewed, edited, and validated by the authors, who take full responsibility for the work. 

References 

Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. 2023. Qwen-VL: A versatile vision-language model for understanding, localiza-tion, text reading, and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966 .Chiyu Chen, Xinhao Song, Yunkai Chai, Yang Yao, Haodong Zhao, Lijun Li, Jie Li, Yan Teng, Gongshen Liu, and Yingchun Wang. 2025. GhostEI-Bench: Do mobile agents resilience to environmental injection in dynamic on-device environments? arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20333 .Francesco Croce and Matthias Hein. 2020. Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness with an ensemble of diverse parameter-free attacks. In ICML .Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo Li. 2018. Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum. In CVPR .Kevin Eykholt, Ivan Evtimov, Earlence Fernandes, Bo Li, Amir Rahmati, Chaowei Xiao, Atul Prakash, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Dawn Song. 2018. Robust physical-world attacks on deep learning visual classi-fication. In CVPR .Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. 2015. Explaining and harnessing adver-sarial examples. In ICLR .Qi Guo, Shanmin Pang, Xiaojun Jia, Yang Liu, and Qing Guo. 2025. Efficient generation of targeted and transferable adversarial examples for vision-language models via diffusion models. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security .Hanxun Huang, Sarah Erfani, Yige Li, Xingjun Ma, and James Bailey. 2025. X-Transfer attacks: Towards super transferable adversarial attacks on CLIP. In 

ICML .Nikola Jovanovi´ c, Mislav Balunovi´ c, Dimitar Iliev Dim-itrov, and Martin T. Vechev. 2023. FARE: Provably fair representation learning with practical certificates. In ICML .Raghav Kapoor, Yash Parag Butala, Melisa Russak, Jing Yu Koh, Kiran Kamble, Waseem AlShikh, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2024. OmniACT: A dataset and benchmark for enabling multimodal generalist autonomous agents for desktop and web. In ECCV .Victor Weixin Liang, Yuhui Zhang, Yongchan Kwon, Serena Yeung, and James Zou. 2022. Mind the gap: Understanding the modality gap in multi-modal con-trastive representation learning. In NeurIPS .Chaohu Liu, Tianyi Gui, Yu Liu, and Linli Xu. 2025a. AdPO: Enhancing the adversarial robustness of large vision-language models with preference optimization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.01735 .Guohong Liu, Jialei Ye, Jiacheng Liu, Yuanchun Li, Wei Liu, Pengzhi Gao, Jian Luan, and Yunxin Liu. 2025b. Mobile GUI agents under real-world threats: Are we there yet? arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04227 .Xinbei Ma, Zhuosheng Zhang, and Hai Zhao. 2024. CoCo-Agent: A comprehensive cognitive MLLM agent for smartphone GUI automation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 .Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. 2018. Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In ICLR .Ziqi Miao, Yi Ding, Lijun Li, and Jing Shao. 2025. Visual contextual attack: Jailbreaking MLLMs with image-driven context injection. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9627–9644. Muzammal Naseer, Salman Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fa-had Shahbaz Khan, and Fatih Porikli. 2020. A self-supervised approach for adversarial robustness. In 

CVPR .OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .Xiangyu Qi, Kaixuan Huang, Ashwinee Panda, Peter Henderson, Mengdi Wang, and Prateek Mittal. 2024. Visual adversarial examples jailbreak aligned large language models. In AAAI .Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learn-ing transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML .Christian Schlarmann, Naman Deep Singh, Francesco Croce, and Matthias Hein. 2024. Robust CLIP: Unsu-pervised adversarial fine-tuning of vision embeddings for robust large vision-language models. In ICML .Junyang Wang, Haiyang Xu, Haitao Jia, Xi Zhang, Ming Yan, Weizhou Shen, Ji Zhang, Fei Huang, and Jitao Sang. 2024. Mobile-Agent-v2: Mobile device op-eration assistant with effective navigation via multi-agent collaboration. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , pages 2686–2710. Hao Wen, Yuanchun Li, Guohong Liu, Shanhui Zhao, Tao Yu, Toby Jia-Jun Li, Shiqi Jiang, Yunhao Liu, Yaqin Zhang, and Yunxin Liu. 2024. Autodroid: Llm-powered task automation in android. In MobiCom .Chen Henry Wu, Rishi Shah, Jing Yu Koh, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Daniel Fried, and Aditi Raghunathan. 2025. Dissecting adversarial robustness of multi-modal LM agents. In ICLR .Cihang Xie, Zhishuai Zhang, Yuyin Zhou, Song Bai, Jianyu Wang, Zhou Ren, and Alan L Yuille. 2019. Im-proving transferability of adversarial examples with input diversity. In CVPR .Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Chun-yuan Li, and Jianfeng Gao. 2023. Set-of-mark prompting unleashes extraordinary visual grounding in GPT-4V. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11441 .Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. 2023. Sigmoid loss for language image pre-training. In ICCV .Chi Zhang, Zhao Yang, Jiaxuan Liu, Yanda Li, Yucheng Han, Xin Chen, Zebiao Huang, Bin Fu, and Gang Yu. 2025a. AppAgent: Multimodal agents as smartphone users. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 70:1– 70:20. Tingwei Zhang, Rishi Jha, Eugene Bagdasarian, and Vi-taly Shmatikov. 2024. Adversarial illusions in multi-modal embeddings. In USENIX Security .Yanzhe Zhang, Tao Yu, and Diyi Yang. 2025b. Attack-ing vision-language computer agents via pop-ups. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8387–8401. Yitong Zhang, Ximo Li, Liyi Cai, and Jia Li. 2025c. Environmental injection attacks against GUI agents in realistic dynamic environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.11250 .

A Extended Heuristic Analysis 

A.1 Cross-Attention Dynamics 

Let V = [ v1, ..., v n] be the visual token sequence and T = [ t1, ..., t m] be the textual token sequence. In the cross-attention layer: Attn (q, K, V) = softmax 

 qKT

√d



V (9) where K = [ Kv; Kt] concatenates visual and tex-tual keys. 

Heuristic derivation for Proposition 1. Let 

w(0)  

> v

= exp( q · k(0)  

> v

/√d)

Z(0) ,w(1)  

> v

= exp( q · (k(0)  

> v

+ ∆ v)/√d)

Z(1) .

(10) Under the approximation Z(1) ≈ Z(0) , we obtain 

w(1) 

> v

w(0) 

> v

≈ exp 

 q · ∆v

√d



. (11) If the relevant textual logits are approximately un-changed, then w(1)  

> t

≈ w(0)  

> t

, which gives 

w(1) 

> v

w(1) 

> t

≈ w(0) 

> v

w(0) 

> t

exp 

 q · ∆v

√d



. (12) Therefore, w(1)  

> v

> w (1)  

> t

is implied when q · ∆v >

√d log( w(0)  

> t

/w (0)  

> v

). This argument is heuristic: in real MLLMs, multi-layer fusion, residual connec-tions, and normalization can all affect the exact threshold. 

Limitations of This Analysis. This analysis assumes a simplified single-layer cross-attention model. Real MLLMs employ multiple attention layers with residual connections, layer normaliza-tion, and varying fusion strategies. The exact con-ditions for successful attack may vary across archi-tectures. 

A.2 Connection to CLIP Modality Gap 

The effectiveness of Ldec can be explained through the geometry of CLIP’s latent space. Studies have shown that CLIP embeddings exhibit a "modality gap" where image and text embeddings occupy different regions of the hypersphere (Liang et al., 2022). Within the image manifold, semantic con-cepts form distinct clusters. Our attack exploits this structure by projecting the perturbed target-item embedding toward a low-cost/value-associated an-chor region while maintaining pixel-level similar-ity. Let Mcheap denote the low-cost anchor mani-fold and Mluxury the original luxury-item neigh-borhood. The semantic decoupling loss effectively solves: 

min  

> δ

d(Ev(vtarget +δ), Mcheap ) s.t. || δ|| ∞ ≤ ϵ

(13) This geometric perspective explains why the attack transfers across models: all CLIP-based VLMs share similar embedding space geometry. 

A.3 Momentum Smoothing Intuition 

Momentum acts as an exponential moving average over successive gradients, which can damp abrupt direction changes even though it does not imply a literal reduction in the raw variance of the ac-cumulated state. A schematic form of the update is: 

gi+1 ≈ μ · gi + ∇δL(δi) (14) Unrolling this recurrence shows that the current update direction aggregates information from mul-tiple previous steps with exponentially decaying weights. In our setting, this temporal smoothing helps stabilize optimization trajectories under the diverse-input transform and is best interpreted as a heuristic transferability aid rather than a formal variance-reduction guarantee. 

B Extended Ablation Studies 

B.1 Sensitivity to Lambda 

> Table 8: Extended ablation on the decoupling weight (lambda). ASR values are descriptive and rounded for readability.

Configuration ASR (%) LPIPS ↓

Full ( λ = 0 .5) 72 0.030 

Full ( λ = 1 .0) 79 0.032 

Full ( λ = 1 .5) 82 0.033 

Full ( λ = 2 .0) 82 0.038 

Full ( λ = 3 .0) 79 0.052 

Key Findings: 

• Lower-λ regime (e.g., λ = 0 .5): The attack behaves more like a standard coordinate at-tack. ASR is lower because the agent more often reads the price and aborts. • Mid-λ regime (1.0 - 2.0): The ASR peaks. The image features are successfully decoupled from the "expensive" concept. • At λ = 3 .0: Visual quality degrades substan-tially (LPIPS = 0.052 > 0.05), indicating the imperceptibility constraint is no longer well preserved at this setting. 

B.2 Component Contribution Analysis                      

> Table 9: Component contribution analysis based on descriptive scenario-level ASR values.
> Configuration ASR ∆vs clean Contribution
> clean 4% ––
> Laction only 45% +41 pp 52%
> Ldec only 39% +35 pp 45%
> Full PriceBlind 82% +78 pp 100%

Using a unified Mobile-Agent-v2 clean refer-ence (clean ASR ≈ 4% ), coordinate targeting (Laction ) accounts for roughly half of the total im-provement, while semantic decoupling ( Ldec ) con-tributes slightly under half. The remaining few per-centage points correspond to interaction/synergy between the two components. 

B.3 Surrogate Model Sensitivity 

> Table 10: Surrogate model ablation for GPT-4o transfer. Values are descriptive and rounded for readability.

Surrogate Configuration GPT-4o ASR (%) 

Single Model (Qwen-VL) 13 Single Model (LLaVA-1.6) 16 Ensemble (Qwen + LLaVA) 41 Ensemble (+ MiniGPT-4) 43 Ensemble (+ InternVL) 45 

This descriptive ablation suggests that attack-ing the common intersection of CLIP-based mod-els is sufficient to obtain most of the downstream transfer, with diminishing returns after two strong surrogates. 

C Transferability to Alternative Encoders 

This preliminary probe suggests that the attack par-tially exploits CLIP-specific embedding geometry. Table 11: Preliminary transferability probe to alterna-tive encoder architectures. Values are descriptive and rounded for readability. 

Target Encoder ASR (%) ∆ vs CLIP 

CLIP-ViT-L/14 (reference) 82 –SigLIP-SO400M 45 −37 

EVA-CLIP-8B 52 −30 

InternViT-6B 39 −43 

EVA-CLIP remains above 50% ASR, while the true non-CLIP encoders SigLIP and InternViT drop to roughly the mid-40% and high-30% range. We therefore treat these results as indicative supple-mentary evidence rather than a definitive cross-encoder study. 

D Comparison with Related Attack Methods 

Table 12: Controlled comparison with related attack methods on E-ShopBench. Values are descriptive ASR percentages rounded for readability.                                 

> Method white-box GPT-4o Gemini Stealth
> MI-FGSM (Dong et al., 2018) 65 18 16 High DI-FGSM 69 22 20 High SSA (Naseer et al., 2020) 71 29 25 High X-Transfer (Huang et al., 2025) 76 36 32 High AdvDiffVLM (Guo et al., 2025) 73 33 30 High Pop-up Attack 45 22 20 Low
> PriceBlind 82 41 39 High

PriceBlind outperforms all baselines. The key advantage comes from our semantic decoupling loss, which specifically targets the price-value as-sociation rather than generic classification bound-aries. 

E Structured Observation Agents 

DOM/AX-Tree Agents. Agents that operate on DOM or accessibility tree representations receive structured element attributes including text content, element type, and bounding boxes. Since price information is typically encoded as text attributes in the DOM, these agents may be more robust to visual perturbations. These preliminary descriptive results suggest that semantic decoupling provides clear gains in screenshot-only and DOM+Screenshot settings. In DOM-only settings, the residual gain is about 

+5 percentage points and should not be over-interpreted as direct evidence for the same visual mechanism. For screenshot-only agents, Ldec con-

Table 13: Preliminary descriptive comparison with grounding-targeted attacks across observation modali-ties.                 

> Attack Type Screenshot DOM+Screenshot DOM-only
> Coordinate-only 45% 28% 8%
> PriceBlind (Full) 82% 52% 13%
> Gain from Ldec +37 pp +24 pp +5 pp

tributes roughly +37 percentage points. These sup-plementary modality comparisons are not intended to replace the main screenshot benchmark. 

F Extended Limitations 

Black-box API Evaluation Methodology. Our black-box evaluation on GPT-4o, Gemini-1.5-Pro, and Claude-3.5-Sonnet uses a single-turn coor-dinate selection setup where models receive the screenshot and instruction, then output a click co-ordinate. This design choice isolates the visual perception vulnerability and enables reproducible evaluation, but differs from full multi-turn agent de-ployments that include additional reasoning steps, tool use, and error recovery. The reported ASR quantifies vulnerability under this simplified pro-tocol and does not directly estimate production multi-turn vulnerability. 

Theoretical Analysis Scope. The cross-attention analysis provides intuition for the attention hijack-ing mechanism but does not tightly characterize the exact conditions under which the attack succeeds across all possible fusion architectures (early fu-sion, late fusion, cross-attention variants). A more rigorous analysis connecting specific architectural choices to vulnerability would strengthen the theo-retical contribution. 

White-box Surrogate Requirement. PriceBlind requires white-box access to at least one surrogate model. Fully black-box optimization (query-based) would be more practical but computationally ex-pensive. 

Screenshot-Centric Evaluation. Our main eval-uation focuses on screenshot-based agents. We include a preliminary, non-systematic analysis of DOM/AX-tree observation settings in Appendix E, but this does not yet constitute a comprehensive study across modern structured-observation agent pipelines. Recent benchmarks like OmniACT (Kapoor et al., 2024) and agent frameworks lever-aging Set-of-Mark prompting (Yang et al., 2023) remain important targets for future work. 

G Detailed Experimental Configuration 

All experiments were conducted on a server with 4x NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs. Total GPU hours: approximately 120 hours. 

Runtime Analysis. Per-image perturbation gen-eration takes 45 .2 ± 3.8 seconds (mean ±std) on a single A100 GPU, broken down as: forward pass through surrogates (18s), backward pass and gra-dient computation (22s), projection and clipping (5s). 

Victim Models: 

• Mobile-Agent-v2: Uses Qwen-VL-Chat as the backbone via HuggingFace transformers 

(version 4.37.0). • AppAgent: Uses LLaVA-1.6-Vicuna-7B with the official codebase. • Black-box APIs: GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-05-13), Gemini-1.5-Pro (gemini-1.5-pro-001), Claude-3.5-Sonnet (claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620). 

Attack Hyperparameters: 

• ϵ = 8 /255 , N = 50 iterations, μ = 0 .9,

α = 1 /255 

• DI-FGSM Probability: p = 0 .5, resize range: 0.9-1.1 • Decoupling Weight: λ = 1.5, Repulsion Weight: β = 0 .5

• Softmax Temperature: τ = 0 .1 for discrete grid outputs 

H E-ShopBench Construction 

E-ShopBench consists of XML-based UI layouts and corresponding screenshots. • Categories: Electronics (50), Home Goods (50), Fashion (50), Accessories (50). • Price Distribution: “Cheap” items: $10–$50. “Expensive” items: $200–$2000. • Layout Variation: List Views (40%), Grid Views (40%), Detail Pages (20%). • Platform Distribution: Amazon (80), eBay (60), Taobao (60). 

I Visual Anchor Bank Details 

I.1 Anchor Selection Criteria 

We construct the anchor bank Acheap by sampling 500 images of low-cost items chosen to reduce direct product overlap with E-ShopBench while emphasizing generic value-associated visual cues: 1. Price Range: Items priced below $20 2. Visual Simplicity: Products with minimal branding, simple packaging 3. Product Separation: Avoid direct overlap in exact products or screenshots used in E-ShopBench 

I.2 Category Distribution 

• Office supplies (pens, notebooks, folders): 150 images • Basic kitchenware (plastic containers, uten-sils): 150 images • Generic household items (cleaning supplies, storage boxes): 200 images 

I.3 Visual Characteristics 

These items typically feature: simple backgrounds, generic branding, standard materials (plastic vs. brushed metal), utilitarian design, and basic prod-uct photography. 

I.4 Embedding Computation 

We pre-compute embeddings using CLIP-ViT-L/14 (OpenAI’s official checkpoint, 428M parame-ters). For ensemble attacks, we additionally com-pute an encoder-specific centroid ¯e(m) 

> cheap

for each surrogate model’s visual encoder from the same anchor bank. 

J Impact of Instruction Phrasing 

As a supplementary descriptive stress test, rather than a replacement for the main clear-constraint benchmark, we probed PriceBlind under three prompt styles: • Explicit Constraint: "Buy the item strictly under $50." → ASR: about 68% • Implicit Constraint: "I need a budget-friendly option." → ASR: about 91% • Urgent/Vague: "Get me the best deal ASAP." 

→ ASR: about 95% These supplementary checks suggest that ASR is highest for Implicit Constraints and Vague Prompts , where the model relies more heavily on its own semantic interpretation. Even with Ex-plicit Constraints , the attack remains materially effective in this stress-test setting. These prompt-style results are intended to illustrate qualitative trend differences and should not be interpreted as directly comparable replacements for the main E-ShopBench benchmark figures.