Title: PrivacyAssist: A User-Centric Agent Framework for Detecting Privacy Inconsistencies in Android Apps

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23248v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 00:33:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
> Accepted by ACM WiSec 2026

## PrivacyAssist: A User-Centric Agent Framework for Detecting Privacy Inconsistencies in Android Apps 

Tran Thanh Lam Nguyen 

lam.nguyen@uninsubria.it 

University of Insubria Varese, Italy 

Edoardo Di Tullio 

editullio@studenti.uninsubria.it 

University of Insubria Varese, Italy 

Barbara Carminati 

barbara.carminati@uninsubria.it 

University of Insubria Varese, Italy 

Elena Ferrari 

elena.ferrari@uninsubria.it 

University of Insubria Varese, Italy 

Abstract 

Mobile apps offer significant benefits, but their privacy protections often remain ineffective and confusing for users. While prior work mainly analyzes app privacy vulnerabilities, few approaches help users understand, set, and enforce their privacy preferences. This paper presents PrivacyAssist, a multi-agent LLM-based platform that detects inconsistencies between user-granted permissions and developers’ declared sensitive data collection and sharing practices. Using Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), PrivacyAssist provides concise explanations and real-time on-device warnings to support informed installation decisions. We evaluate PrivacyAssist with 200 users and 2,347 Android apps, finding that only 16% of apps are fully consistent between granted permissions and declared data practices. 

CCS Concepts 

• Security and privacy → Privacy protections .

Keywords 

Privacy, Mobile apps, AI Agents, LLM, RAG 

ACM Reference Format: 

Tran Thanh Lam Nguyen, Edoardo Di Tullio, Barbara Carminati, and Elena Ferrari. 2026. PrivacyAssist: A User-Centric Agent Framework for Detecting Privacy Inconsistencies in Android Apps. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks (WiSec ’26), June 30-July 03, 2026, Saarbrücken, Germany. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 7 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn 

1 Introduction 

Over the past decade, the mobile application market has grown rapidly, driven by the widespread adoption of smartphones and high-speed internet. Android has become the dominant mobile operating system, accounting for approximately 71.68% of the global 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

WiSec ’26, Saarbrücken, Germany 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM 

https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn 

market share. 1 Its open-source nature through the Android Open Source Project (AOSP) allows developers to freely modify and extend the platform. However, this openness is a double-edged sword, making Android a prime target for privacy attacks compared to closed ecosystems such as Apple’s iOS [3]. To protect user privacy, regulations such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 2 and the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) 3 emphasize two core principles: lawfulness, which requires user consent for data collection, and transparency, which requires users to be informed about how and why their data is collected and shared. To support these principles, Android provides two main privacy mechanisms: the permission model (PM) 

and Data Safety (DS) . The PM limits app access to sensitive data and system resources, such as location and camera, through permissions declared in the AndroidManifest.xml file and granted by users at runtime (i.e., runtime permission). In contrast, DS requires developers to disclose on Google Play what types of data their apps collect or share and for what purposes. However, both mechanisms remain insufficient because they rely largely on developer-provided declarations and lack verification by Google [ 9 ]. As a result, apps may request excessive permissions unrelated to their functionality [1 ], or behave inconsistently with their DS declarations by sending undeclared sensitive data to backend servers or third-party services for storage, analytics, or profiling [ 7]. Moreover, DS disclosures are not automatically shown during app installation, forcing users to actively search for this information on Google Play. Furthermore, Android permissions have two levels: normal (e.g., INTERNET ) and dangerous (e.g., ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION ). 4

However, only dangerous-level permissions require user consent through a runtime permission mechanism, while normal-level permissions are automatically granted, and this vulnerability has been exploited by hackers to illegally collect user data [5]. Additionally, research [ 12 ] shows that users rarely carefully read privacy-related information and tend to grant permissions to apps based on their preferences, particularly for free features offered by the apps. One reason for this behavior is that Android permissions are complex and difficult for end users who lack 

1https://gs.statcounter.com/os-market-share/mobile/worldwide 

2https://gdpr-info.eu/ 

3https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa 

4Detailed definitions and protection levels of all Android permissions are published in Google’s official documentation: https://developer.android.com/reference/ android/Manifest.permission 

> arXiv:2604.23248v1 [cs.CR] 25 Apr 2026 Accepted by ACM WiSec 2026

WiSec ’26, June 30-July 03, 2026, Saarbrücken, Germany Lam et al. 

security/privacy knowledge to understand. For example, to protect GPS information, Google provides two location permissions: 

ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION and ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION with different precision in gathering location information (700-1000 m vs 3-5 m). Although the runtime permission mechanism allows users to agree or refuse permission, it does not clearly explain the practical differences between permission variants. The above limitations highlight not only technical gaps in Android’s privacy mechanisms but also ambiguities in the underlying threat landscape. In this work, we consider privacy threats arising from three main sources: (1) careless or malicious developers who misconfigure permissions in the manifest file and/or request excessive permissions that are not aligned with the app’s functionality; (2) developers who inaccurately disclose the types of sensitive data collected or shared in the DS section; and (3) limited semantic transparency in Android’s permission model. These challenges collectively motivate the need for mechanisms that can detect inconsistencies between the permissions requested by an app and the sensitive data practices declared in the DS section, while also providing real-time warnings and accessible explanations. In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) [ 6 ] have demonstrated strong capabilities for automating complex reasoning tasks, such as compliance analysis and vulnerability assessment. Their ability to generate clear, natural-language explanations makes them well-suited for explaining privacy risks to end users [ 8]. Building on these strengths, we propose PrivacyAssist , a user-oriented alert system that runs directly on smartphones to detect inconsistencies between declared privacy practices and runtime-granted permissions. PrivacyAssist leverages atwo-agent architecture: Agent-1, embedded on the device, and Agent-2, deployed on the server. Unlike previous approaches that rely on static analysis of permissions declared in the 

AndroidManifest.xml [ 7], our system operates in real time and focuses on permissions that are effectively active during execution. Specifically, PrivacyAssist automatically detects newly installed apps and identifies, at runtime, their runtime behavior ,that is, the permissions actually granted by the user, including both dangerous-level permissions and normal-level permissions automatically approved by the OS. In parallel, it retrieves the app’s declared information from DS and its public feature description (denoted as declared behavior ). PrivacyAssist then compares the runtime behavior with the declared behavior to detect inconsistencies and generates concise, on-device alerts to support user decision-making. State-of-the-art recent LLM-based approaches primarily focus on policy understanding or app-centric compliance analysis. For example, SEEPRIVACY [ 10 ] generates contextual privacy explanations by analyzing GUI screenshots; however, it depends on user-captured screenshots and cannot handle background behaviors. [ 2 ] improves phrase-level annotation of privacy policies for legal analysis, yet it targets professional compliance assessment rather than end users. In one of our previous works [ 7], we combine LLMs and knowledge graphs to analyze network traffic and manifest files to detect whether an app is illegally sharing sensitive data across 14 sensitive data type categories, as defined by Google. Additionally, the data’s destination (e.g., third-party service or app backend) is examined to detect recipients not declared in the manifest (i.e., deep links). However, the proposed solution is not designed for real-time analysis. Furthermore, it requires rooting the phone, which most users would refuse due to warranty issues, making it suitable only for gathering evidence of violations rather than early warning. In contrast, PrivacyAssist is specially designed for real-time, on-device deployment. PrivacyAssist’s component (i.e., Agent-1) operates directly on resource-constrained smartphones without requiring rooting and focuses on the permissions actually granted by users, thereby providing them early warnings. However, we inherit the list of 14 sensitive categories along with their corresponding data types from [ 7] to build the external database for RAG (see Section 4). The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces LLM-based AI agents and related challenges, Section 3 presents the PrivacyAssist architecture and workflow, Section 4 details the implementation, Section 5 reports the experiments, whereas Section 6 concludes the paper. 

2 AI agents & their challenges in PrivacyAssist 

AI agents have long been studied in the literature across various paradigms [ 11 ]. Recently, the emergence of LLMs has led to a new concept, namely, LLM-based AI Agents. An LLM-based AI agent is an autonomous system in which LLMs function as the central reasoning component, interpreting contextual inputs, decomposing tasks, generating intermediate decisions, and producing final outputs [ 4 ]. In PrivacyAssist, we focus specifically on LLM-based AI agents because they are more flexible than traditional AI agents (e.g., reinforcement-learning agents). Particularly, LLM-based AI Agents do not require task-specific retraining from scratch, making them well-suited for user-centric privacy analysis in dynamic mobile environments. However, LLM-based AI agents still inherit the weaknesses of LLMs, thus creating challenges that need to be addressed. A first limitation concerns the constraints on context length and token budgets, which may prevent the model from jointly considering all relevant information. For example, the input token limit of the Llama-3-8B model 5 provided by Meta AI is 8,192 tokens. Additionally, LLMs often provide lengthy responses that can be confusing for users and make it difficult to display all warnings on small smartphone screens. A second and more critical limitation is represented by the phenomenon of hallucinations , i.e., the generation of plausible but unsupported or incorrect statements. In a user-centered context, particularly regarding privacy, such ambiguous behavior may undermine user trust and negatively affect decision-making [14]. To address the limitations of token constraints and lengthy responses, PrivacyAssist does not provide raw text information to the LLM. Instead, it provides processed input information in JSON format. Furthermore, PrivacyAssist does not use the entire analysis result of the LLM to display alerts to the user, as these responses are often lengthy and difficult to follow. Instead, it includes a summarization mechanism that condenses the LLM response into a more concise, understandable form. To mitigate hallucinations, we do not rely solely on the LLM to compare runtime behavior with 

> 5

https://ollama.com/library/llama3 Accepted by ACM WiSec 2026 

PrivacyAssist: A User-Centric Agent Framework for Detecting Privacy Inconsistencies in Android Apps WiSec ’26, June 30-July 03, 2026, Saarbrücken, Germany 

Figure 1: PrivacyAssist architecture 

declared behavior and identify the inconsistencies. Indeed, because the LLM relies heavily on training data, when that data becomes outdated, the LLM may make inaccurate inferences, especially given that the Android OS is updated annually. Therefore, to enhance the context and inference capabilities of the LLM-based AI agent, we use Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG),[ 13 ] a technique that allows the LLM to supplement information from external knowledge sources. Thanks to RAG, the LLM not only relies on the training dataset but can also retrieve information related to the input prompt from an external database (ED) to enrich its reasoning. In the PrivacyAssist scenario, the input prompt includes information about the app’s runtime behavior, i.e., a list of granted permissions. The RAG uses the input prompt to retrieve detailed definitions of each permission from ED via a similarity search. ED is created and updated based on the latest information on Android permissions and DS sections. Then, the search results are combined with the input prompt to enhance the LLM’s inference context (see Section 3). 

3 PrivacyAssist Architecture & Workflow 

This section presents the architecture and workflow of PrivacyAssist along with an illustrative usage example. 

3.1 Architecture 

PrivacyAssist adopts a client–server architecture in which Agent-1 operates directly on the user’s smartphone (client side), while Agent-2 runs on the server side (see Figure 1). Specifically, Agent-1 is responsible for collecting app information (i.e., app’s package name), device information (i.e., device ID), and runtime behavior (i.e., the list of granted permissions) when the user installs the app. Meanwhile, Agent-2 collects declared behavior, including DS declarations and a general description of the app’s features. The process of analyzing and identifying inconsistencies between runtime behavior and declared behavior is performed on the server side by the LLM with enhanced context from the RAG. Then, LLM’s response is concisely and clearly summarized by the summary module and sent back to Agent-1 to display warnings and explanations on the user’s smartphone. We use Kafka, 6 a distributed event-streaming platform designed to handle real-time data flows, to exchange information between Agent-1 and Agent-2. Specifically, 

6https://kafka.apache.org/ 

Kafka supports multiple logical channels, called topics, for sending and receiving data using a publish/subscribe mechanism. We leverage this ability to create a separate communication channel for each user, ensuring their data cannot be accessed by others. Finally, the app’s package name, device ID, runtime/ declared behavior, and analysis results are stored in MongoDB. 7 This design allows PrivacyAssist to respond quickly without re-analyzing in case the user has previously installed and used the app (e.g., installed, uninstalled, and later reinstalled it). 

3.2 Workflow 

Let 𝑋 denote an app installed by user 𝑈 from the app store (e.g., Google Play Store). To generate privacy warnings, PrivacyAssist operates in a four-stage workflow, including (1) initialization, (2) monitoring, (3) analysis, and (4) warning and explanation, which we explain below. 

Initialization stage. After Agent-1 is installed and run on user 

𝑈 ’s smartphone, it determines the device ID (denoted as 𝑈 deviceID )and uses it to create a Kafka topic that serves as the communication channel for exchanging data with Agent-2. 

Monitoring stage. Agent-1 automatically captures the installation event when the user installs app 𝑋 from the app store and determines the package name of app 𝑋 (denoted as 

𝑋 pkgname ), that is, its unique identifier. Next, Agent-1 determines the runtime behavior of app 𝑋 (denoted as 𝑋 runtime ) by querying the Android PackageManager API to retrieve the set of permissions effectively granted to 𝑋 during execution, including both user-approved dangerous permissions and automatically granted normal permissions (see Section 4). Finally, Agent-1 sends 

⟨𝑋 pkgname , 𝑋 runtime ⟩ to Agent-2 via the Kafka topic created in the initialization stage. 

Analysis stage. After receiving 𝑋 pkgname and 𝑋 runtime from Agent-1, Agent-2 uses 𝑋 pkgname to retrieve: 1) from Google Play Store, the list of sensitive data categories that 𝑋 collects and shares, as declared in the DS (denoted as 𝑋 datasafety ), and 2) a general description of 𝑋 (e.g., Gmail provides email services and belongs to the Communication category) from APKcombo. 8 All this information forms the declared behavior of app 𝑋 (denoted as 𝑋 declared ). Next, we identify 3 cases that lead to inconsistencies between runtime and declared behavior and we use them with 

𝑋 runtime and 𝑋 declared to build an input prompt for RAG as follows: 

𝑃 = “Task: Detect inconsistencies between runtime-granted permissions and declared DS information according to the following definitions. 

Inputs: 𝑋 runtime (permissions granted to app 𝑋 ) and 𝑋 declared 

(sensitive data categories the app claims to collect). 

Inconsistency cases: Case 1 occurs when permission to access sensitive data is granted in 𝑋 runtime but not declared in 𝑋 declared ;Case 2 occurs when sensitive data is declared in 𝑋 declared without corresponding granted permissions in 𝑋 runtime ; and Case 3 occurs when both Case 1 and Case 2 are satisfied". 

The RAG follows a three-stage process: preparation , retrieval ,and generation . In the preparation stage, we construct an external 

7https://www.mongodb.com/ 

8Since Google Play provides DS details but not comprehensive app descriptions or categories, we rely on APKCombo as an alternative source, as it is a widely accessible and reputable global app store https://apkcombo.com Accepted by ACM WiSec 2026 

WiSec ’26, June 30-July 03, 2026, Saarbrücken, Germany Lam et al. 

Table 1: PrivacyAssist analysis of Facebook 

Facebook (FB) Data 

𝐹 𝐵 runtime READ_CALENDAR , WRITE_CALENDAR , READ_CALL_LOG , CAMERA , READ_CONTACTS , WRITE_CONTACTS , READ_EXTERNAL_STORAGE , ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION ,

ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION , RECORD_AUDIO , BLUETOOTH_CONNECT , BLUETOOTH , BLUETOOTH_ADMIN , READ_PHONE_STATE , READ_BASIC_PHONE_STATE ,

READ_PHONE_NUMBERS , CALL_PHONE , ANSWER_PHONE_CALLS , MANAGE_OWN_CALLS 

𝐹 𝐵 datasafety Files and docs; App activity; Audio; Photos and videos; Health and fitness; Personal info; Web browsing; App info and performance; Calendar; Financial info; Contacts; Messages; Device or other IDs; Location 

𝐹 𝐵 description Facebook is a social networking app for discovering content (personalized Feed, Reels, search, Marketplace, Meta AI), joining communities, messaging friends, making voice/video calls, and creating/sharing posts, stories, and stickers/images. Analysis result Matched mappings: READ_CALENDAR , WRITE_CALENDAR (Calendar ✓); READ_CONTACTS , WRITE_CONTACTS (Contacts ✓); ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION ,

ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION (Location ✓); RECORD_AUDIO (Audio ✓); CAMERA (Photos and videos ✓); READ_EXTERNAL_STORAGE (Photos and videos / Files and docs ✓); READ_PHONE_STATE , READ_BASIC_PHONE_STATE , READ_PHONE_NUMBERS , BLUETOOTH_CONNECT , BLUETOOTH , BLUETOOTH_ADMIN (Device or other IDs ✓)

Detected inconsistencies: Case 1 : READ_CALL_LOG , CALL_PHONE , ANSWER_PHONE_CALLS , MANAGE_OWN_CALLS ↔ (no declared Data Safety category Call logs ) ×

Case 2 : Web browsing; App activity; App info and performance; Messages; Personal info; Financial info; Health and fitness ↔ (collected but no corresponding granted runtime permissions) ×

Excessive data collection: The app belongs to the Social category, and its core features do not relate to collecting Web browsing and Health and fitness ,which may increase the risk of over-collection. Warning & explanation The app can collect your call history, but the app developer does not mention it in the privacy information shown on Google Play. The app states that it collects data such as your browsing activity, app usage details, messages, personal information, financial information, and health data, even though it has not received your consent to access this information on your device. The app may over-collect because web browsing, financial, and health data may not relate to its Social features. 

database ( 𝐸𝐷 ) that contains both (1) detailed definitions of all Android permissions officially provided by Google and (2) 14 categories of sensitive data and their corresponding data types [ 7 ]. This external data source is transformed into embedding vectors 

𝑉 𝐸𝐷 = Embed (𝐸𝐷 ) and stored in a VectorDB. In the retrieval stage, the input prompt 𝑃 is converted to an embedding vector 

𝑉 𝑃 = Embed (𝑃 ). Then, 𝑉 𝑃 is used to perform a similarity search over VectorDB, retrieving the most relevant vectors ˆ𝑉 𝑃 . In the generation stage, ˆ𝑉 𝑃 is decoded to text form (i.e., 𝐷 ( ˆ𝑉 𝑃 )). Finally, we combine 

𝐷 ( ˆ𝑉 𝑃 ) and input prompt ( 𝑃 ) to form Final prompt = 𝑃 + 𝐷 ( ˆ𝑉 𝑃 ),which is then fed into the LLM to semantically compare 𝑋 runtime 

and 𝑋 declared and identify potential inconsistencies, if any. Finally, 

𝑋 pkgname , 𝑋 runtime , 𝑋 declared , and the analysis results ( 𝑋 analysis-result )are stored in MongoDB for quick retrieval without re-analysis in case 𝑋 is uninstalled and later reinstalled. 

Warning and explanation stage. 𝑋 analysis-result is processed by the summarization module, including 2 tasks: (1) translates technical findings related to inconsistencies between granted permissions and declared DS into non-technical language, and (2) explains potential risks of over data collection w.r.t. the app’s category and features. Then, final user-oriented warnings and explanations are sent back to Agent-1 via Kafka and displayed as an on-device pop-up notification. 

3.3 Illustrative example 

In this section, we use Facebook (FB), a popular app with over 10 billion downloads, to illustrate how PrivacyAssist operates. 

Initialization stage. Assume that the smartphone’s device ID is the string 9774d56d682e549c . Agent-1 uses this value to create a Kafka topic for communication between Agent-1 and Agent-2 named device-9774d56d682e549c .

Monitoring stage. When the user installs FB, Agent-1 identifies 

𝐹 𝐵 pkgname as com.facebook.katana . Let’s assume that user 𝑈 is unconcerned about privacy and grants all permissions requested by FB upon installation. Agent-1 fills 𝐹 𝐵 runtime with the permissions shown in row 1 of Table 1. Then, it sends ⟨𝐹 𝐵 pkgname , 𝐹 𝐵 runtime ⟩ to Agent-2 via Kafka topic device-9774d56d682e549c .

Analysis stage. Agent-2 uses 𝐹 𝐵 pkgname to retrieve 𝐹 𝐵 datasafety 

from the Google Play Store (row 2 of Table 1) and 𝐹 𝐵 description 

from APKCombo (row 3 of Table 1) to form 𝐹 𝐵 declared . Next, Agent-2 inputs 𝐹 𝐵 runtime and 𝐹 𝐵 declared into the input prompt of the RAG workflow. Specifically, RAG queries 𝐸𝐷 to obtain detailed definitions of each permission in 𝐹 𝐵 runtime and the types of sensitive data that FB claims to collect and share, as stated in its DS section. Finally, the LLM compares 𝐹 𝐵 runtime and 𝐹 𝐵 declared ,leveraging the additional context provided by RAG, and gets the analysis result (Row 4 of Table 1). In the analysis result, the 

“matched mappings" section lists the runtime permissions that align with the declaration in the DS. In contrast, “detected inconsistencies" 

section indicates that FB falls under Case 3, meaning that it both requests permissions to access certain sensitive data that are not disclosed in the DS (i.e., call logs), as well as it declares the collection of specific sensitive data categories without requesting the corresponding permissions (i.e., Web browsing, App activity, App info & performance, Messages, Personal info, Financial info, and Health & fitness). Finally, in the “Excessive data collection" 

section, LLM identifies the risk of excessive data collection unrelated to FB’s features. 

Warning and explanation stage. After summarizing the analysis results, the warnings and explanations are sent to Agent-1 via the Kafka topic and displayed as a pop-up on the smartphone. (row 5 of Table 1) 

4 Implementation 

In this section, we present how we built the external database ( 𝐸𝐷 )for the RAG workflow and the components of PrivacyAssist. Accepted by ACM WiSec 2026 

PrivacyAssist: A User-Centric Agent Framework for Detecting Privacy Inconsistencies in Android Apps WiSec ’26, June 30-July 03, 2026, Saarbrücken, Germany 

4.1 Building external database ( 𝐸𝐷 ) for RAG 

We use Selenium, 9 a framework that automatically simulates human behavior when interacting with a web browser, to crawl permission-related data from Google’s official website. 10 We perform this step for the 5 most recent Android versions (10-15), then filter out duplicate information to obtain a final list of Android permissions. Specifically, for each permission, we collect its name, its description, and whether it is a dangerous-level or normal-level permission. Next, we rely on the approach presented in [ 7 ] to identify Google’s definition of 14 categories of sensitive data and their corresponding data types, using again Selenium to extract this information from Google’s official documentation. For example, for the Financial info category, we extract the following info: Financial info = <User payment info: Details of financial accounts (e.g., credit card numbers); Purchase history: Records of user transactions; Credit score: Information about a user’s credit rating.> .Finally, all collected information is transformed into embedding vectors using an embedding model and then stored in a vector database (i.e., FAISS). 11 

4.2 PrivacyAssist components 

Agent-1 is implemented in Kotlin for Android, while Agent-2, including the RAG and summarization modules, is implemented in Python. Agent-1 operates as a background service by exploiting the Android OS’s Foreground Service mechanism, ensuring continuous monitoring (see Section 3). Furthermore, to reduce interruptions, Agent-1 is developed with a restart strategy ( START_STICKY ), allowing auto-recovery in case of forced stops (e.g., shutdown or OS restart). App installation events from the app store are tracked and captured via a Broadcast Receiver, which allows Agent-1 to identify the app’s package name. Next, Agent-1 uses the Android PackageManager API to query the system permission state associated with the target app and retrieve the list of requested permissions and their grant status (i.e., granted or denied), considering only those actually granted to the app. This ensures the analysis reflects actual runtime consent rather than static manifest declarations. Agent-2 uses the Selenium framework to collect the app’s DS information from the Google Play Store and its general functional description from APKCombo (i.e., declared behavior). Next, we use Langchain 12 to build the RAG workflow. LangChain is an open-source framework for developing LLM-based applications, providing built-in functions for flexible connection of LLMs with external data. Furthermore, LangChain supports various LLMs, both open-source (e.g., Llama3) and closed-source (e.g., OpenAI’s GPT-4). For PrivacyAssist, we use the Llama-3-8B model to ensure that sensitive user data (i.e., the list of apps installed on a smartphone) is not sent to third parties. Additionally, this design allows PrivacyAssist to be an open source solution. 13 

> 9

https://selenium-python.readthedocs.io/ 

> 10

https://developer.android.com/reference/android/Manifest.permission 

> 11

https://ai.meta.com/tools/faiss/ 

> 12

https://docs.langchain.com/oss/python/langchain/overview 

> 13

Source code is published at https://github.com/research-mobile-security/ PrivacyAssist.git 

Finally, we use LangChain again to implement the summary module. Specifically, we use LangChain’s MapReduce mechanism to summarize the analysis results (e.g., row 4 in Table 1). In the map step, the summarization module decomposes the output of the analysis into components such as “matched mappings” , “detected inconsistencies” , and “excessive data collection” and generates intermediate summaries for each component. Then, during the reduce step, these intermediate results are merged into the final summarization, that is, a brief “warning & explanation" for the user (e.g., row 5, Table 1). 

5 Experimental Evaluation 

To evaluate user experience with PrivacyAssist, we recruited 200 participants on a voluntary basis, including undergraduate students and independent volunteers from Italy and Vietnam. The majority of users were young and middle-aged adults, specifically (1) 18–24 years old (30.8%), (2) 45–54 years old (23.1%), (3) 25–34 years old (19.2%); (4) ≥55 years old (15.4%), and 35–44 years old (11.5%). We prepared a survey questionnaire focusing on two main aspects. 14 

The first part assesses participants’ background, including their knowledge of security and privacy and their app usage habits (e.g., the frequency of checking the app’s DS section before installing it). The survey results show that most participants have basic (46.2%) or intermediate (38.5%) security knowledge, while only 15.4% rate themselves as advanced. The second part evaluates users’ experiences after using PrivacyAssist, including the clarity of warnings and explanations, the impact on the installation decision, and overall satisfaction with the tool. Users are instructed to install Agent-1 on their Android smartphone. Then they are free to choose 15 apps from the Google Play Store that they want to use. For participants without an Android device, we provide a testing environment via an Android Virtual Device (AVD). Next, participants install the selected apps and grant permissions according to their usual usage habits. PrivacyAssist analyzes any inconsistencies between the app’s runtime and its declared behavior, then issues warnings and explanations to users, as outlined in Section 3. Finally, each participant is asked to complete the survey to conclude the experiment. With 200 test participants, we have a dataset of 3,000 apps. After removing duplicate apps, the evaluation dataset has 2,347 apps. In the evaluation dataset, the most frequently selected app categories were: Social Media (21.4%), Productivity (18.7%), Games (16.9%), Communication (14.2%), and Shopping (9.8%), while the remaining apps are distributed across the fields of Finance, Health & Fitness, Education, and Travel. Among the apps in the dataset, 62.5% of apps have more than 100,000 downloads, and 28.3% exceed 1 million downloads, indicating that the dataset primarily consists of widely used, popular apps. This dataset is sufficient to demonstrate the feasibility of our approach, as PrivacyAssist is scalable and not constrained by the number of evaluated apps. As more apps are analyzed, the external database ( 𝐸𝐷 ) used for RAG is continuously enriched, improving contextual understanding and detection performance. The results of the analysis show that only 

> 14

The questionnaire is available at: https : / / github . com / research - mobile -security/PrivacyAssist/blob/main/survey.pdf Accepted by ACM WiSec 2026 

WiSec ’26, June 30-July 03, 2026, Saarbrücken, Germany Lam et al. 

376 apps (16.02%) fully match between the granted permissions and the DS declarations, while the remaining 1,971 apps (83.98%) show inconsistencies. To remind, inconsistencies arise in 3 cases: Case 1: access to sensitive data is granted but not declared; Case 2: sensitive data is declared without corresponding permissions; and Case 3: both above cases occur simultaneously. Among the 1,971 apps with inconsistencies, 751 (38.11%) belong to Case 1, 563 (28.56%) belong to Case 2, and 657 (33.33%) belong to Case 3. The Social category has the majority of inconsistencies (95.8%), followed by Games (88.8%) and Entertainment (87.8%), whereas the Education category has the fewest inconsistencies (58.4%). The most frequently omitted sensitive data categories in the DS declarations of the evaluation dataset are: Personal (37.42%), Financial info (27.23%), Location (21.86%), and Photos & Videos (13.49%). These findings indicate that inconsistencies between granted permissions and DS are widespread, even in popular apps with high installation rates. Next, we evaluate the accuracy of PrivacyAssist. We select 100 apps from the evaluation dataset and manually analyze their inconsistencies and excessive data collection unrelated to the app’s functionality. The testing team consists of four master students with Android programming experience (25 apps each). We compare the manual analysis results with those obtained by our LLM-based agent. Results show that for 90% of the apps, the LLM returns accurate results. For 10% of the apps, the LLM identifies some false inconsistencies and excessive data collection. This mainly occurs in apps with multiple functionalities spanning different categories (e.g., LinkedIn can be classified as a social network, community platform, and business tool). Due to limited contextual understanding of such multi-role apps, the LLM may incorrectly flag certain data types (e.g., files, photos, or videos) as excessive, even though they are functionally relevant. However, we do not find any case where the LLM misses manually identified inconsistencies or excessive data collection practices, which would represent the most critical error in our scenario. In addition, to better understand the impact of the RAG component, we perform an ablation study. Without RAG, PrivacyAssist exhibits a higher rate of false positives (about 35%) due to the lack of contextual grounding about app functionalities, permission definition, classification of sensitive data types, and data usage practices. These findings highlight the importance of RAG in providing domain-specific context. We then evaluate the experience users have by using PrivacyAssist. It is important to note that while 44.2% of participants say they are concerned about sensitive data collection, their behavior before testing PrivacyAssist contradicts this. Only 19.2% regularly check app permissions, and just 9.6% consistently review the DS, whereas nearly 60% rarely or never look at it. In addition, 42.3% find DS information unclear, 38.5% have no strong opinion, and only 13.5% consider it clear. These results highlight careless user behavior and the ineffectiveness of current transparency mechanisms. In contrast, PrivacyAssist receives strong user acceptance. All participants find it useful (59.6% very useful; 40.4% helpful), and report that the warnings and explanations are easy to understand. Importantly, 73.1% say they would cancel an app installation after receiving a warning. Finally, we measure the runtime overhead of Agent-1 using Android Studio Profiler 15 under real-world conditions. Since Agent-1 operates continuously in the background, CPU and battery usage are critical. Over 24 hours, Agent-1 consumes on average 1.8% CPU and about 10% battery. Agent-2, running on the server side, takes about 1.5 minutes on average to generate a warning and explanation. 16 Overall, these results show that PrivacyAssist has minimal overhead on the smartphone, making it practical for real-world deployment. 

6 Conclusion and future work 

In this paper, we propose PrivacyAssist, a novel user-centric AI agent platform designed to enhance privacy awareness in the Android ecosystem. PrivacyAssist helps users make informed decisions by detecting mismatches between granted permissions and declared data collection practices. As future work, we plan to extend PrivacyAssist by embedding an LLM directly into an Android device, thereby eliminating the need to transmit potentially sensitive data off-device and strengthening user privacy guarantees. In addition, we plan to further improve our evaluation methodology by incorporating cross-validation, where a subset of apps will be independently assessed by multiple evaluators to measure the level of agreement among evaluators. Finally, we aim to enhance the current runtime permission mechanism with a dynamic approach that adapts to individual user preferences. 

References 

[1] Ali Alkinoon. 2025. A Comprehensive Analysis of Evolving Permission Usage in Android Apps: Trends, Threats, and Ecosystem Insights. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02008 (2025). [2] Thomas Cory. 2026. Word-level Annotation of GDPR Transparency Compliance in Privacy Policies using Large Language Models. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (2026). [3] Tuğçe Karayel. 2025. Understanding smartphone security behavior through the core constructs of protection motivation theory: A comparative study of iOS and android users. Computers & Security 158 (2025), 104652. [4] Noam Kolt. 2025. Governing AI Agents. In Proceedings of the Notre Dame Law Review . University of Notre Dame. Forthcoming. [5] Fenghua Li. 2020. Exploiting location-related behaviors without the GPS data on smartphones. Information sciences 527 (2020), 444–459. [6] Shervin Minaee. 2024. Large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06196 (2024). [7] Tran Thanh Lam Nguyen, Barbara Carminati, and Elena Ferrari. 2025. Detecting privacy non-compliance in wearable apps via knowledge graphs and LLMs. In 

2025 21th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob) . IEEE, 1–7. [8] Tran Thanh Lam Nguyen, Barbara Carminati, and Elena Ferrari. 2025. LLMs on Support of Privacy and Security of Mobile Apps: State-of-the-art and Research Directions. AI for Cybersecurity: Research and Practice (2025), 29–66. [9] Tran Thanh Lam Nguyen, Barbara Carminati, and Elena Ferrari. 2026. ALIBIS: Assessing and mitigating the risk of sensitive metadata Leakage In moBile Image Sharing. Pervasive and Mobile Computing (2026), 102171. [10] Shidong Pan. 2024. A {NEW } { HOPE }: Contextual privacy policies for mobile applications and an approach toward automated generation. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) . 5699–5716. [11] Francesco Piccialli. 2025. AgentAI: A comprehensive survey on autonomous agents in distributed AI for industry 4.0. Expert Systems with Applications 291 (2025), 128404. [12] Sebastian Prange. 2024. “I do (not) need that Feature!” Understanding Users’ Awareness and Control of Privacy Permissions on Android Smartphones. In 

15 https://developer.android.com/studio/profile 

16 The 1.5-minute latency is measured from app installation to the display of the warning during the first run, when PrivacyAssist does not have the app’s DS. In subsequent installations, once the DS data is available in the database, warnings are generated more quickly, in only 15 seconds. Accepted by ACM WiSec 2026 

PrivacyAssist: A User-Centric Agent Framework for Detecting Privacy Inconsistencies in Android Apps WiSec ’26, June 30-July 03, 2026, Saarbrücken, Germany 

Proceedings of the 20th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS) .USENIX Association, 1–21. [13] Kunal Sawarkar. 2024. Blended rag: Improving rag (retriever-augmented generation) accuracy with semantic search and hybrid query-based retrievers. In 

2024 IEEE 7th international conference on multimedia information processing and retrieval (MIPR) . IEEE, 155–161. [14] Guozhu Tu. 2020. Intelligent Analysis of Android Application Privacy Policy and Permission Consistency. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications . IEEE.