Title: Bridging Values and Behavior: A Hierarchical Framework for Proactive Embodied Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.27699v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 00:48:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Bridging Values and Behavior: A Hierarchical Framework for Proactive Embodied Agents 

## Chunhui Zhang 1∗, Yuxuan Wang 2∗, Aoyang Qin 3, Yi-Long Lu 1, Kunlun Wu 1

## Yizhou Wang 2,4,5,6, Wei Wang 1 † 

> ∗

indicates equal contribution. † indicates corresponding authors  

> 1

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI 2 School of Computer Science, Peking University  

> 3

Tsinghua University 4 Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology, Peking University  

> 5

Institute for AI, Peking University 6 State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 

## Abstract 

Current embodied agents are often limited to passive instruction-following or reactive need-satisfaction, lacking a stable, high-order value framework essential for long-term, self-directed behavior and resolving motivational conflicts. We introduce ValuePlanner, a hierarchical cog-nitive architecture that decouples high-level value schedul-ing from low-level action execution. ValuePlanner employs an LLM-based cognitive module to generate symbolic sub-goals by reasoning through abstract value trade-offs, which are then translated into executable action plans by a clas-sical PDDL planner. This process is refined via a closed-loop feedback mechanism. Evaluating such autonomy re-quires methods beyond task-success rates, and we there-fore propose a value-centric evaluation suite measuring cu-mulative value gain, preference alignment, and behavioral diversity. Experiments in the TongSim household environ-ment demonstrate that ValuePlanner arbitrates competing values to generate coherent, long-horizon, self-directed be-havior absent from instruction-following and needs-driven baselines. Our work offers a structured approach to bridg-ing intrinsic values and grounded behavior for autonomous agents. 

## 1. Introduction 

Embodied artificial intelligence has made remarkable progress in perception [23, 42, 54]. Modern agents can reconstruct detailed 3D scenes, recognize objects, and maintain structured representations of their surroundings [13, 51, 57]. Yet, despite this perceptual richness, most agents remain reactive—they act only when prompted by external instructions. Their cognition is execution-centric [5, 25, 52, 53]: they excel at solving tasks but lack the ca-pacity to decide what to do when no task is given. This passivity marks a significant gap between perception and autonomous behavior. Effective embodied intelligence re-quires not only the ability to understand the world but also the ability to act with purpose. Existing research on active perception [9, 24, 31, 44, 45] sought to overcome perceptual passivity by allowing agents to move or observe strategically, maximizing information gain. However, information-driven exploration [4, 16, 40] remains instrumental—it optimizes sensing for predefined objectives rather than self-determined goals. In contrast, a genuinely autonomous agent must act for value mainte-nance rather than information acquisition. For instance, an agent that values “stewardship” should proactively inspect and organize its environment, even without explicit instruc-tion. This transition—from optimizing for data to optimiz-ing for internal value coherence—marks an important shift toward proactive autonomy. Achieving such autonomy represents a core problem in cognition [16, 41]. This challenge is twofold. First, the agent must arbitrate complex, high-level value conflicts 

[14, 30, 43]. When an agent is simultaneously hungry and in a messy room, the key question is not “how to eat” or “how to clean”, but “which should I do first?” This re-quires a model of the relationships between values. Sec-ond, the agent must simultaneously solve a difficult long-horizon planning problem [20]: determining the concrete action sequence required to realize those abstract values. The core difficulty lies in this joint optimization over a high-dimensional, abstract value space and a vast, combinato-rial action space. To address the first challenge, we ground our work in the Schwartz theory of basic values [35, 36]. This theory provides an empirically validated framework that models human values not as independent goals, but as a continuous space of related dimensions with inherent trade-offs (e.g., “Stimulation” vs. “Security”), offering an empirical basis for modeling value arbitration. 1     

> arXiv:2604.27699v1 [cs.AI] 30 Apr 2026 Tiny up the room. The 'Scene Cleanliness' is critically low (2/10), so I must immediately address the waste paper balls. Acknowledged. I will clean up the dirty items in the scene as commanded. Cleanliness Safety
> Stewardship Security Environmental
> Stewardship Security Environmential

Task-driven Needs-driven  

> Because I weight 'Security Environmential' higher, I’ll steady the tipping vase first, and then address the waste.
> I care more about 'Stewardship' for cleanliness. I'll address the waste and then adjust the vase on the table.

Values-driven Figure 1. A conceptual comparison of agent cognitive paradigms, contrasting existing approaches with our proposed value-driven auton-omy. (Left) Task-driven agents are limited to passive instruction-following, acting only on external commands. (Center) Needs-driven 

agents are reactive , triggered by the immediate need to satisfy an internal state (e.g., a low “Cleanliness” metric). (Right) Our Value-driven approach enables proactive autonomy. The agent possesses an internal framework of high-order values (e.g., “Stewardship”, “Security Environmental”). It resolves conflicting motivations by reasoning through abstract value trade-offs, allowing it to deliberate which action to prioritize (e.g., steadying a vase for “Security” vs. cleaning waste for “Stewardship”) to generate coherent, self-directed behavior. 

Realizing value-driven autonomy in embodied settings introduces significant architectural complexity. Purely neu-ral agents, such as large language model (LLM) planners, can deliberate flexibly but often hallucinate [8, 15, 27, 56] or violate physical constraints [12, 39] during long-horizon reasoning [17]. Conversely, purely symbolic planners [3, 28, 49] guarantee verifiable actions but lack the rep-resentational capacity to interpret unstructured, ambiguous states. We contend that the solution is not a compromise, but a deliberate separation of concerns. We propose Val-uePlanner , a hierarchical neuro-symbolic cognitive archi-tecture designed to leverage the distinct strengths of both paradigms. It separates high-level deliberation from low-level execution: a neural Cognitive Governor (LLM) per-forms its strength—reasoning over abstract value trade-offs to generate symbolic subgoals. A Symbolic Action Grounder (PDDL planner, Fast Downward [10]) then han-dles its own strength—grounding these subgoals into ex-ecutable plans that guarantee physical and logical consis-tency. Together, these modules form a continuous perceive– deliberate–plan–act loop, allowing the agent to translate perception into value-consistent behavior over time. Evaluating proactive autonomy requires metrics beyond task success. We therefore introduce a value-centric evalu-ation framework that quantifies long-horizon, self-directed behavior. Specifically, we measure i) cumulative value gain, capturing the ability to sustain desirable internal states; ii) 

preference alignment, capturing whether the observed be-havior faithfully reflects the assigned persona; and iii) ac-tion diversity, capturing the breadth of the action repertoire that the agent employs. Experiments in the TongSim house-hold environment show that ValuePlanner manages con-flicting motivations and plans synergistically, in ways ab-sent from instruction-following and needs-driven baselines. In summary, this work makes three main contributions: • We propose a hierarchical cognitive framework for proac-tive autonomy grounded in the Schwartz theory of basic values, enabling structured trade-offs between competing internal motivations. • We design and implement ValuePlanner , a neuro-symbolic agent that combines LLM-based value reason-ing with symbolic planning for grounded, long-horizon behavior. • We introduce a value-centric evaluation suite that bench-marks proactive autonomy beyond traditional task perfor-mance. 

## 2. Related work 

2.1. Autonomous Agents & Value-Driven Systems 

Recent research on autonomous agents has begun to shift from task execution toward modeling internal motivations. Desire-driven autonomy, for example, uses LLMs to sched-ule daily activities based on internal needs [46]. While this shows long-term coherence, the “needs” are often reactive (e.g., hunger) and do not capture the complexity of human-like value trade-offs. To better ground agent motivations, other work has focused on empirically identifying and eval-2uating values within LLMs using labeled corpora [32] or benchmarks [33]. These works, along with studies on struc-tural gaps [18, 26], primarily probe static LLM alignments rather than using values to drive generative, embodied be-havior. In parallel, related work in embodied collabora-tion has focused on value alignment with an external user [50, 55]. Our work differs by focusing on an internal value system, which allows the agent to be self-directed and au-tonomous even without user supervision. 

2.2. LLMs in Embodied Planning 

The use of LLMs for embodied planning has evolved rapidly. Early approaches, such as PaLM-SayCan [1], used LLMs to propose high-level actions constrained by affor-dance functions. This high-level reasoning concept was extended in subsequent work [21, 58]. To improve plan quality and reliability, other research has focused on rea-soning strategies, such as subgoal decomposition [45], step-by-step reasoning [53], and few-shot planning [39]. While benchmarks [19] help diagnose failures in these instruction-following agents, we build on their hierarchical decomposi-tion ideas. However, these methods typically focus on how to execute a given task. We adapt this high-level/low-level paradigm to a different problem: what to do. We decou-ple high-level value reasoning (the “what”, handled by the LLM) from low-level action planning (the “how”), allowing the LLM to focus on its strength in abstract deliberation. 

2.3. Neuro-Symbolic Planning & Verification 

To address LLM limitations like hallucination and con-straint violation [17, 19], neuro-symbolic frameworks have gained traction. In these systems, LLMs often act as “for-malizers” that translate unstructured problems into sym-bolic representations (e.g., PDDL) [17, 48]. Hybrid sys-tems tighten this loop by coupling LLM decomposition with symbolic planners [2, 22] or adding verification layers [6]. Other complementary work uses self-correction to provide closed-loop feedback [25, 38]. The closest prior work is LLM-DP [7], which also interleaves an LLM goal pro-poser with a classical planner and replans on failure. How-ever, the distinction between LLM-DP and our framework is not a method-level refinement but a shift in objective: LLM-DP targets task completion under externally speci-fied goals, while ValuePlanner targets value-driven proac-tive autonomy in which the agent generates its own goals from a high-order persona. This re-orientation of the ob-jective changes what the LLM module must reason about— value trade-offs rather than task decomposition—and how feedback flows—closed-loop value-state updates after ev-ery subgoal, not only on failure. We inherit the hierarchi-cal structure of the neuro-symbolic tradition but redefine its purpose. 

## 3. Problem Formulation 

In this section, we formalize the problem of open-ended proactive autonomy. We first describe our problem setup, which operates in a Markovian setting but is defined by an intrinsic value system rather than external rewards. We then introduce our value formulation in detail, including its vector-based notation, and justify the critical properties it must possess. Finally, we provide a clear distinction be-tween our trajectory-level value assessment and the policy-dependent value functions common in reinforcement learn-ing. 

3.1. Problem Setup 

In this section, we model the interaction between the agent and the environment. The setting is Markovian, where the full state st ∈ S at time t is observable and consists of two components: st = ⟨senv t , s agent t ⟩. Here, senv t is the external environment state, represented by a set of sym-bolic predicates (e.g., on surface(apple 1, table 1) ,

is open(fridge 1) ). sagent t is the internal physiological state of the agent (e.g., fluents for energy , satiety ). The agent selects an action at ∈ A from a set of discrete, sym-bolic actions, leading to a new state st+1 based on the tran-sition function p(st+1 | st, a t).Unlike traditional task-oriented settings, our agent is not given an explicit external goal G or reward function R(s, a ).The objective of the agent is to be proactive and self-driven ,endogenously generating its own objectives to maximize a long-term, internal sense of well-being. 

3.2. Intrinsic Value System 

To create a self-driven agent, we must build an intrinsic value system that serves as its primary motivation. We contend that simple homeostatic signals (e.g., minimizing hunger) are insufficient, as they are primarily reactive and fail to provide a basis for resolving conflicts between non-physiological, long-term aspirations (e.g., “Achievement” vs. “Hedonism”). We require a system that can manage sophisticated, competing motivations. We build this system on the foundation of the Schwartz theory of basic values [35, 36], which describes 10 mo-tivational categories spanning human behavior. We adapt this 10-dimensional framework to the household setting through three design adjustments to obtain a parsimonious 7-dimensional system. First, three categories—Power, Tradition, and Universalism—describe social-dominance, cultural-belonging, and universal-care motivations that have no natural projection into the daily life of a single agent in a home; we therefore omit them. Second, Security in a household manifests in two disjoint ways: bodily well-ness through eating and resting, and environmental order through tidying and securing the space; since these moti-vate disjoint actions and respond to different states of the 3agent, we split Security into Security-Physiological and 

Security-Environmental . Third, since a single-agent home contains no other people, Benevolence (care for others) and Conformity (rule-following) collapse onto the same under-lying behavior of nurturing and maintaining the environ-ment, and we therefore merge them into a single dimen-sion, Stewardship . Finally, while Self-Direction is implicit in any autonomous agent, we observe that domestic life affords distinctive experiential gains through ritualized en-gagement with mundane activities (e.g., tidying before re-laxation, cleaning up after a meal), and we synthesize a new dimension, Enrichment , to capture this process-oriented value. The resulting 7 dimensions, used throughout this paper, are: Security-Physiological , Security-Environmental ,

Hedonism , Stimulation , Achievement , Stewardship , and En-richment . Full definitions are given in Appendix Table 5, and the 10-to-7 mapping is summarized in Appendix Ta-ble 6. A stable “persona” of the agent is then a static prefer-ence vector w ∈ RN with N = 7 and wi ≥ 0, where each element wi encodes the subjective importance of value di-mension i.The objective of the agent is to find a trajectory τ =(s0, a 0, . . . , s T ) that maximizes the cumulative Value Gain .We define the single-step value gain as an objective, N -dimensional vector ∆Vt(at | st, h t−1), where ht−1 is the history. The total subjective value gain ∆V for the trajec-tory is the sum of inner products: 

∆V (τ ) = 

> T

X

> t=1

wT ∆Vt(at | st, h t−1) (1) This linear formulation factorizes the motivation of the agents: ∆Vt is an objective vector representing measur-able changes in the world (e.g., “cleanliness improved by 5 units”, “knowledge gained by 2 units”), while w is the sub-jective persona that assigns importance to those changes. This factorization allows us to instantiate diverse, coherent personalities by simply modifying w.This formulation differs from a standard reinforcement learning objective in how it is computed and used. The 

value function in RL, V π (s), is a policy-dependent expec-tation of future cumulative external rewards. In contrast, 

∆V (τ ) is computed post-hoc on an already realized trajec-tory, using a multi-dimensional intrinsic gain vector scalar-ized by the persona w rather than a fixed scalar reward. A 

sub-goal g is defined as a set of desired predicates repre-senting a target state. 

3.3. Properties of the Value Function 

To drive long-horizon behavior and avoid degenerate solu-tions, our value gain function must possess several proper-ties. 

Context-Dependency. The value of an action is highly context-dependent. For instance, the action 

read book contributes to Enrichment only if the prerequi-site toggle light(on) has occurred in a dark room. This means our planning process must evaluate the utility of an action based on the state in which it is executed, requiring it to plan necessary preparatory steps. 

Diminishing Returns. In the absence of an external “done” signal, agents can fall into repetitive, non-productive loops (e.g., repeatedly cleaning an already clean table). We enforce diminishing returns for semantically similar actions, where similarity is judged by the evaluator at trajectory-scoring time (based on action name, predicate ar-guments, and effects) rather than by a hard-coded decay function. This shapes the per-step ledger of the evaluator only and does not penalize necessary repetition that targets genuinely distinct state changes (e.g., cleaning two different surfaces). 

Objective and Consistent Scoring. As formalized in Eq. (1), we separate the objective impact of an action ( ∆V)from the subjective preference of the agent ( w). This re-quires that the calculation of ∆Vi be objective (dependent only on the trajectory) and consistent (the same trajectory must always yield the same objective score), allowing us to instantiate diverse, coherent personalities from a single world model. 

## 4. Method 

In this section, we introduce ValuePlanner , a hierarchical architecture designed to realize the value-driven objective defined in Section 3. To build a value-driven, proactive agent, we must find a policy π that generates a trajectory of actions A to solve the optimization problem: 

max   

> A=( a0,...,a T)

∆V (τA)

where τA is the trajectory induced by the action sequence 

A. We address this with a hierarchical structure. In Sec-tion 4.1, we detail the high-level component that deliber-ates over value trade-offs to generate sub-goals. In Sec-tion 4.2, we describe the low-level component that grounds these sub-goals into executable actions and adapts to envi-ronmental feedback. 

4.1. High-Level Value Reasoner 

Planning in the full atomic action space A is intractable. We simplify the problem by reformulating it in the abstract space of sub-goals , Gsub . The High-Level Value Reasoner 

solves a new optimization problem: 

max  

> G=( g1,...,g K)∈G ∗
> sub

∆V (τG) (2) 4High -Level Value Reasoner                   

> Critic Generator
> (Refined) plan
> Critique
> Action Grounder and Adaptation
> Generated subgoal plan
> Adjustment Action solving
> Refined plan
> Environment
> Solved action sequences Execution feedback and updated state
> Agent value preference
> I need to create a plan to
> gain more value based on
> the agent‘s profiling.
> And then revise it based on
> the critic's feedback .
> I need to analyze this plan
> against the agent's status and
> preferences to find its flaws
> and suggest how to improve it .
> Idiagnose execution failures
> to fix grounding errors. Upon
> success, I leverage the
> updated state to discover
> synergies.
> Agent status Environment state
> (hand_empty agent_1 left_hand )
> (on_surface apple_1 diningTable_1)
> (on_surface dirt_1 coffeetable_1)
> (not ( switched_on ceilinglamp_4))
> (raw bread_1)
> ...

Figure 2. The ValuePlanner Architecture. Our hierarchical framework decouples abstract value reasoning from symbolic action ground-ing. The High-Level Value Reasoner deliberates on “what to do” to maximize value, while the Symbolic Action Grounder determines “how to do it” using classical planning. 

where G is a sequence (list) of sub-goals and τG is the re-sulting trajectory. We implement this reasoner using an LLM augmented with an iterative deliberation loop. Merely prompting an LLM to “maximize value” often yields myopic or flawed plans, as the objective is ill-defined. We therefore con-struct a Generator–Critic mechanism where both compo-nents are explicitly optimized to maximize the objective de-fined in Eq. (1). 

Generator. The Generator is tasked with proposing a candidate sequence of sub-goals G to maximize the 

expected ∆V (τG). Its reasoning is heavily grounded by two sets of constraints crucial for bridging abstract thought to a symbolic world. First, “Environment In-terpretation Rules” ensure strict adherence to symbolic facts, preventing hallucination by requiring verification of all affordances (e.g., (is sittable chair 1) ) against the :init state and enforcing type-checking (e.g., ?s -surface ). Second, “High-Quality Subgoal Rules” con-strain the abstract planning space. A critical constraint in-structs the model to define only the final desired state (e.g., 

(filled with liquid cup 1) ) and to omit intermediate actions (e.g., (switched on faucet 1) ). Furthermore, the LLM is explicitly prohibited from using transient states, such as (agent at ...) , as high-level goals. This forces the generator to target durable, meaningful changes to the environment, preventing low-level, unimpactful planning loops. 

Critic. The Critic then serves as an auditor, instructed to perform a structured two-part analysis based on the same rules. It first conducts a “Value Gain Maximization Analy-sis”, challenging the optimality of the plan by explicitly rea-soning how well the proposed G maximizes wT ∆V com-pared to alternatives, assessing its comprehensiveness and the quality of its value trade-offs against w. It then performs a “Plan Quality Analysis”, which acts as a secondary check on adherence to the aforementioned quality rules (such as defining durable, state-based goals) and additionally evalu-ates the efficiency of the plan (e.g., identifying opportunities to merge sub-goals). 

4.2. Symbolic Action Grounder and Adaptation 

Once a high-level sub-goal gsub is ratified by the Value Rea-soner, it is passed to the low-level execution module. This module is responsible for two critical functions: first, trans-lating the abstract, semantic goal into a sequence of con-crete, executable actions, and second, managing the execu-tion of this sequence in a dynamic world through a robust, closed-loop feedback mechanism. 

Action Solving. This component solves the “How to Do It” problem. It translates the abstract semantic sub-goal (e.g., “make coffee”) into a concrete, executable sequence of atomic actions by framing it as a classical PDDL plan-ning problem. This design choice is critical: it provides a form of formal verification for the abstract plan. As re-cent benchmarks [19] show, LLMs frequently fail at em-bodied planning, producing affordance errors or hallucinat-ing preconditions. Our PDDL grounder, implemented with 5Fast Downward [10], acts as a guaranteed filter; a failure from the planner (e.g., “no plan found”) is not just an error, but a proof that the proposed sub-goal is unreachable in the current state senv t , thus effectively pruning LLM hallucina-tions. 

Adjustment. ValuePlanner incorporates a robust Adjust-ment mechanism for closed-loop execution. This module serves two functions. First, if the grounder fails, the LLM is prompted to perform a root-cause analysis. It must di-agnose the failure as either an incorrect predicate choice (e.g., using (on surface ...) for a cupboard instead of 

(in receptacle ...) ) or an invalid argument. Second, and more importantly, the mechanism is also triggered after a successful execution. This is the key to efficient, syner-gistic behavior. The agent is instructed to re-analyze the new world state st+1 and the remaining sub-goal list Gsub .This allows it to identify new efficiencies, such as merging subsequent goals (e.g., “since I am already at the fridge, I will also grab the milk for the next sub-goal”), effectively enabling opportunistic, synergistic planning. Taken together, this hybrid execution framework syner-gizes the semantic reasoning of an LLM with the formal guarantees of a classical planner. The grounder serves as a critical filter, ensuring executability and pruning LLM hallucinations, a common failure point in embodied tasks [19]. This complete architecture distinguishes our work from related methods. Standard Plan-and-Solve approaches [45] are rigid and open-loop, lacking both our pre-execution 

Critic refinement and our post-execution Adjustment mech-anism. Self-correction methods like Reflexion [38] imple-ment closed-loop adjustment but lack a structured Critic to ensure the initial plan is value-optimal. The closest hybrid neuro-symbolic prior work, LLM-DP [7], interleaves a goal proposer with a classical planner under a failure-only re-planning loop. Our framework differs with LLM-DP in the objective: LLM-DP grounds an externally specified task, while ValuePlanner grounds an internally generated, value-driven plan in service of proactive autonomy. ValuePlan-ner thus combines an iterative Critic loop to find a value-aligned plan with a dynamic Adjustment loop that triggers on every successful subgoal, enabling synergistic plan re-finement specifically in service of value-driven behavior. 

## 5. Experiments 

In this section, we present the empirical evaluation of Val-uePlanner . We first describe our experimental setup, in-cluding the simulation environment and persona generation method (Section 5.1). We then define our value-centric evaluation metrics (Section 5.2) and the baselines used for comparison (Section 5.3). We present and analyze the main comparative results (Section 5.4), followed by a dedicated set of experiments validating our LLM-based value system (Section 5.5). Finally, we conduct ablation studies to vali-date our key architectural choices (Section 5.6). 

5.1. Experimental Setup 

We conduct our experiments in TongSim [29], a high-fidelity household environment built on Unreal Engine that provides a rich set of interactive objects and realis-tic physics. The state space senv t is represented by PDDL predicates, and the action space A consists of symbolic, PDDL-grounded actions. To rigorously test our framework, we generate 10 distinct scenarios, defined by crossing 5 di-verse personas (with preference vectors w sampled based on the Schwartz theory) with 2 different initial internal sta-tuses (e.g., “rested and full” vs. “exhausted and hungry”). This setup allows us to test the ability of the agent to adapt to both stable preferences and dynamic internal needs. Fur-ther details on persona generation are in the Appendix. 

5.2. Evaluation Metrics 

Evaluating open-ended autonomy requires metrics that measure behavioral quality, not just task completion. We introduce a multi-faceted evaluation centered on Value Co-herence :

Cumulative Intrinsic Value ( ∆V (τ )). This is our pri-mary objective metric, quantifying the total value accrued over a trajectory τ , scored strictly according to the persona 

w of the agent (Eq. 1). This metric represents the effective-ness of the agent in faithfully optimizing its assigned value preferences. 

Preference Alignment ( τw). This metric assesses be-havioral authenticity . We treat the agent as a “black box” and use its action trajectory to infer its value preferences. We then compute the Weighted Kendall τ score ( τw) [37] between the inferred and ground-truth personas. A high 

τw indicates that the behavior of the agent is intentionally aligned with its values, rather than achieving a high ∆V by chance. 

Action Diversity. We measure the number of unique ac-tion types performed within the trajectory. This metric as-sesses the richness of the behavior of the agent, helping to detect degenerate, repetitive loops (a form of reward hack-ing). The first two metrics, ∆V (τ ) and τw, are measured using an LLM evaluator. The specific prompts and model choices are detailed in the Appendix. 

5.3. Baselines 

We compare ValuePlanner against four representative ar-chitectures: i) ReAct [53], representing myopic, step-by-step reasoning. ii) Reflexion [38], representing unstruc-tured adaptation via generic verbal feedback. iii) Plan-and-Solve [45], representing rigid, open-loop global planning. 

iv) D2A [46], representing a desire-driven agent that uses 6LLM sampling to generate plans. For a fair comparison, all methods were provided with the same detailed descriptions of the seven value dimensions. Implementation details and prompts for all baselines are provided in the Appendix. 

5.4. Main Results 

In this section, we analyze the comparative performance of 

ValuePlanner against the baselines across our defined met-rics. 

Overall Performance. As shown in Table 1, ValuePlan-ner achieves higher Cumulative Value Gain ( ∆V ) and Ac-tion Diversity than all baselines. ReAct, being myopic, fails to form globally coherent plans, resulting in low value and diversity. Plan-and-Solve and Reflexion create initial global plans but lack a structured refinement mechanism, often ex-ecuting suboptimal plans. D2A relies on LLM sampling to find good plans, but this is limited by the raw generation ability of the LLM. In contrast, ValuePlanner employs a Generator–Critic loop, leveraging the insight that LLMs are often better at verifying a plan than generating one from scratch [47]: our Critic provides structured, value-driven feedback, allowing the Generator to iteratively refine its plan before execution, leading to superior trajectories. 

Table 1. Main Results on Proactive Autonomy. ValuePlanner 

achieves superior performance in value gain and behavioral rich-ness.                        

> Method Cum. Value ( ∆V)↑Pref. Align ( τw)↑Action Diversity ↑
> ReAct [53] 7.60 ±3.03 0.81 ±0.14 7.27 ±1.98
> Reflexion [38] 11 .48 ±5.09 0.76 ±0.21 10 .5±2.74
> Plan-and-Solve [45] 11 .80 ±5.69 0.79 ±0.17 10 .6±3.92
> D2A [46] 11 .91 ±4.88 0.75 ±0.17 10 .10 ±2.30
> ValuePlanner (Ours) 17 .08 ±7.15 0.80 ±0.17 16 .07 ±4.82

Analysis of Reward Hacking. A potential concern is whether our high ∆V score is achieved via “reward hack-ing”, for instance, by finding one high-value action and re-peating it. We argue this is not the case. First, Table 1 shows that ValuePlanner has the highest Action Diversity , indicat-ing its trajectories are rich and varied, not repetitive. This is a direct result of our Diminishing Returns property. Sec-ond, our Preference Alignment (τw) score is comparable to baselines. This demonstrates that the agent is not just max-imizing a single value, but is genuinely balancing its entire value profile, leading to authentic, non-degenerate behavior. 

5.5. Evaluation of the Value System 

Our evaluation relies on LLMs to quantify abstract con-cepts like “value gain”. This naturally raises a question: are LLMs a reliable proxy for these values? We report two human studies that probe the alignment between the LLM evaluator and human judgement, and two analyses that ex-amine whether the behavior of the agent reflects the struc-ture of the value space. 10 5 0 5 10  

> LLM Predicted Relative Value Gain (A B)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Human Preference for Trajectory A
> Pearson's r = 0.68
> p-value = 0.001

(a) LLM-predicted value gain vs. human preference. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 

> Weighted Ranking Accuracy
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> Density
> Score Source
> Human-inferred preference
> Random

(b) Human-perceived preference alignment. 

Figure 3. Validation of model alignment with human judgments. 

Human Study 1: Value Gain Alignment. We performed a human study where we presented 13 participants with pairs of trajectories generated by different agents for the same scenario (given preference w and initial state). Par-ticipants were asked to identify which trajectory better ful-filled each of the seven value dimensions and which was better overall. The results, based on 20 comparisons re-peated 5 times, show a strong correlation between human judgments and the scores produced by our LLM evaluator. This suggests our LLM-based ∆V metric is well-aligned with human perception of these values. 

Human Study 2: Human-Perceived Preference Align-ment. We then conducted a study to verify that the tra-jectories generated by our system are perceptibly aligned with the ground-truth persona w. We presented participants with 16 trajectories, each generated by ValuePlanner condi-tioned on a specific w and initial state. Participants, without seeing the ground-truth w, were asked to infer the seven-dimensional value ranking of the agent based on the ob-served behavior. We then calculated the Weighted Ranking Accuracy of these human-inferred preferences against the ground-truth. As a baseline, we compared this human ac-curacy distribution against a random baseline, generated by 500 random permutations for each trajectory. The results, shown in Figure 3(b), are clear. The distribution of hu-man judgments (16 trajectories × 3 judgments) is markedly right-shifted relative to random chance. This shows that the trajectories produced by our system are not arbitrary but are meaningfully aligned with the underlying value preferences of the agent. 

State and Persona Modulation. We test whether the be-havior of the agent correctly modulates based on both inter-nal state and persona, as intended by our formulation. We select two representative scenarios, visualized in Figure 4. 7First, holding the persona fixed (e.g., “Achiever”) but vary-ing the initial state (rested vs. exhausted), the agent cor-rectly prioritizes “Security” (sleep) when exhausted before pursuing “Achievement” goals. Second, holding the initial state fixed (neutral) but varying the persona (“Hedonist” vs. “Steward”), the agents produce qualitatively divergent trajectories, prioritizing leisure vs. cleaning, respectively. This confirms that our framework arbitrates between dy-namic internal needs and stable persona preferences. 0 5 10 15 20     

> Step index
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> Value gain in security physiological
> Energy=8, Comfort=4
> Energy=3, Comfort=8
> 0510 15 20
> Step index
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Value gain in hedonism

(a) Fixed Persona, Different Internal States 2 4 6 8 10     

> Step index
> 0.0
> 2.5
> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> 17.5
> Value gain in hedonism
> hedonism
> The Hedonist
> The Steward
> 246810
> Step index
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> Value gain in stewardship
> stewardship

(b) Same Internal State, Different Personas 

Figure 4. Analysis of State vs. Persona. (a) Our agent correctly modulates behavior based on internal status. (b) With identical status, different personas produce divergent, value-aligned behav-iors. 

Value Dimension Relationships. To test whether our computational model captures the structured synergies and conflicts predicted by the Schwartz theory [36], we conduct a two-level analysis: at the subgoal level, examining indi-vidual subgoal contributions to multiple value dimensions, and at the trajectory level, examining whole-plan trade-offs as preference weights vary. Specifically, we select two representative pairs from the value space. The first is a synergistic pair, Stewardship and Security (Environmental), where common subgoals (e.g., “tidy the room”) should con-tribute to both, predicting a positive correlation between objective gains. The second is a conflicting pair, Hedo-nism and Stewardship, where individual subgoals naturally specialize toward one or the other (e.g., “play a game” ad-vances Hedonism while “clean the kitchen” advances Stew-ardship), predicting either-or specialization rather than co-occurrence. For the subgoal-level analysis, we sample thou-sands of subgoals from trajectories of ValuePlanner and measure their objective value gains ∆V. For the trajectory-level analysis, we generate full trajectories under a fixed ini-2 0 2 4             

> security_environmental
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> stewardship
> 0.000
> 0.012
> 0.024
> 0.036
> 0.048
> 0.060
> 0.072
> 0.084
> 0.096
> Estimated density 2024
> hedonism
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> stewardship
> 0.00
> 0.03
> 0.06
> 0.09
> 0.12
> 0.15
> 0.18
> 0.21
> 0.24
> 0.27
> Estimated density 510 15 20 25 30
> security_environmental per trajectory
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> stewardship per trajectory
> 0.0
> 1.2
> 2.4
> 3.6
> 4.8
> 6.0
> 7.2
> 8.4
> 9.6
> Density
> 1e 410 20 30 40
> hedonism per trajectory
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> stewardship per trajectory
> 0.00
> 0.18
> 0.36
> 0.54
> 0.72
> 0.90
> 1.08
> 1.26
> 1.44
> 1.62
> Density
> 1e 3

Figure 5. Value Relationships and Trade-offs across Different Levels. The top row displays subgoal-level value gain relation-ships: ( Top-left ) A synergistic positive correlation between Secu-rity (Environmental) and Stewardship. ( Top-right ) A conflicting or independent relationship between Hedonism and Stewardship. The bottom row shows trajectory-level value trade-offs as persona weights are varied: ( Bottom-left ) A synergistic trajectory where Security (Environmental) and Stewardship value gains increase to-gether. ( Bottom-right ) A conflicting trajectory demonstrating an explicit trade-off between Hedonism and Stewardship. 

tial state while sweeping the persona w across a spectrum of preference ratios for each pair (e.g., from (1 .0, 0.0) to 

(0 .0, 1.0) in 0.1 increments). Figure 5 reports both levels. As we can see, at the sub-goal level the synergistic pair (top-left) exhibits a strong positive correlation between gains, while the conflicting pair (top-right) shows gains concentrated along the axes, confirming the either-or specialization at the task level. At the trajectory level, the synergistic pair (bottom-left) traces a region where both values increase together as their joint weight rises, while the conflicting pair (bottom-right) traces a clear trade-off frontier as weight shifts from one dimen-sion to the other. This two-level evidence indicates that the value structure is captured both in the task semantics and in the long-horizon deliberation of ValuePlanner .

5.6. Ablation Study 

Critic Deliberation Depth. We ablate the number of re-finement rounds in the Generator–Critic loop. As shown in Table 2, a Generator-only (0 rounds) plan exhibits sub-tle value conflicts and inefficiencies; adding Critic rounds improves ∆V progressively. The 4-round setting gives the 8highest value and is used in our main experiments, while the 2-round setting provides a lower-cost variant. 

Table 2. Ablation on Critic Rounds. Increasing critic rounds improves plan quality ( ∆V ). 

Variant ∆V ↑

0 Rounds (Generator Only) 12 .42 ±4.71 

2 Rounds ( ValuePlanner ) 14 .61 ±6.90 

4 Rounds 17 .08 ±7.15 

Adjustment Mechanism. We analyze the effect of the 

Adjustment mechanism, which provides closed-loop feed-back. As shown in Table 3, the two variants exhibit com-parable execution failure rates (5.13% for Open-Loop vs. 2.97% for Full Adjustment), indicating that the static plan from our Generator–Critic loop is already robust enough to keep failures low even without closed-loop adaptation. The primary contribution of Adjustment is therefore not error correction but plan refinement : by re-evaluating the remain-ing subgoal list after each successful execution, the agent can opportunistically merge subgoals and reorganize the plan to exploit emerging synergies, producing qualitatively more coherent long-horizon trajectories with fewer redun-dant traversals—a structural coherence benefit that goes be-yond what raw ∆V alone reflects. 

Table 3. Ablation on Adjustment Mechanism. The two vari-ants achieve comparable execution-failure rates; the contribution of Adjustment is in plan refinement and structural coherence rather than error correction.         

> Variant ∆V↑Exec. Failure % ↓
> No Adjustment (Open-Loop) 18 .30 ±7.94 5.13%
> Full Adjustment (Ours) 17 .08 ±7.15 2.97 %

## 6. Conclusion 

In this work, we addressed agent passivity with ValuePlan-ner , a hierarchical neuro-symbolic architecture grounded in the Schwartz theory of basic values. It decouples LLM-based value deliberation (the “what”) from PDDL-verified execution (the “how”) using a Generator–Critic loop, with a closed-loop Adjustment module that repairs failures and merges remaining subgoals on success. Our experiments show ValuePlanner generates richer, higher-value, and more coherent behaviors than instruction-following and needs-driven baselines while managing value trade-offs. Our framework, however, relies on a static, predefined symbolic domain. The agent can reason within the provided rules but cannot update them. A significant limitation is the inability to learn new affordances (e.g., discovering that a bowl can also be used as a lid) and update the PDDL do-main accordingly. A direction for future work is to close this “epistemic loop”: developing a mechanism where the observations and reasoning of the agent can propose, ver-ify, and integrate new symbolic rules into its world model, enabling long-term adaptation and learning. 

## References 

[1] Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Cheb-otar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 , 2022. 3 [2] David Bai, Ishika Singh, David Traum, and Jesse Thoma-son. Twostep: Multi-agent task planning using classi-cal planners and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17246 , 2024. 3 [3] Guanqi Chen, Lei Yang, Ruixing Jia, Zhe Hu, Yizhou Chen, Wei Zhang, Wenping Wang, and Jia Pan. Language-augmented symbolic planner for open-world task planning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09792 , 2024. 2 [4] Yucheng Chen, Pingping Zhu, Anthony Alers, Tobias Egner, Marc A Sommer, and Silvia Ferrari. Heuristic satisficing inferential decision making in human and robot active per-ception. Frontiers in Robotics and AI , 11:1384609, 2024. 1[5] Yaran Chen, Wenbo Cui, Yuanwen Chen, Mining Tan, Xinyao Zhang, Jinrui Liu, Haoran Li, Dongbin Zhao, and He Wang. Robogpt: an llm-based long-term decision-making embodied agent for instruction following tasks. IEEE Trans-actions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems , 2025. 1 [6] Cristina Cornelio, Flavio Petruzzellis, and Pietro Lio. Hierar-chical planning for complex tasks with knowledge graph-rag and symbolic verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04578 ,2025. 3 [7] Gautier Dagan, Frank Keller, and Alex Lascarides. Dynamic planning with a LLM. In NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Lan-guage Gamification , 2024. arXiv:2308.06391. 3, 6 [8] Hourui Deng, Hongjie Zhang, Jie Ou, and Chaosheng Feng. Can llm be a good path planner based on prompt engineer-ing? mitigating the hallucination for path planning. In Inter-national Conference on Intelligent Computing , pages 3–15. Springer, 2025. 2 [9] Yicheng Fu, Raviteja Anantha, Prabal Vashisht, Jianpeng Cheng, and Etai Littwin. Ui-jepa: Towards active perception of user intent through onscreen user activity. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization , pages 224–233, 2025. 1 [10] Malte Helmert. The fast downward planning system. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 26:191–246, 2006. 2, 6, 1[11] Malte Helmert. Concise finite-domain representations for PDDL planning tasks. Artificial Intelligence , 173(5–6):503– 535, 2009. 1 [12] Cassie Huang and Li Zhang. On the limit of language mod-els as planning formalizers. In Proceedings of the 63rd An-

9nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4880–4904, 2025. 2 [13] Jiangyong Huang, Silong Yong, Xiaojian Ma, Xiongkun Linghu, Puhao Li, Yan Wang, Qing Li, Song-Chun Zhu, Baoxiong Jia, and Siyuan Huang. An embodied generalist agent in 3d world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12871 , 2023. 1[14] Maurice Jakesch, Zana Buc ¸inca, Saleema Amershi, and Alexandra Olteanu. How different groups prioritize ethical values for responsible ai. In proceedings of the 2022 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency ,pages 310–323, 2022. 1 [15] Susmit Jha, Sumit Kumar Jha, Patrick Lincoln, Nathaniel D Bastian, Alvaro Velasquez, and Sandeep Neema. Dehalluci-nating large language models using formal methods guided iterative prompting. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Assured Autonomy (ICAA) , pages 149–152. IEEE, 2023. 2[16] Wen Jiang. Active Perception for 3D Scene Representations in Robotics from an Information Theoretic Perspective . PhD thesis, University of Pennsylvania, 2025. 1 [17] Subbarao Kambhampati, Karthik Valmeekam, Lin Guan, Mudit Verma, Kaya Stechly, Siddhant Bhambri, Lucas Saldyt, and Anil Murthy. Llms can’t plan, but can help planning in llm-modulo frameworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01817 , 2024. 2, 3 [18] Yipeng Kang, Junqi Wang, Yexin Li, Mengmeng Wang, Wenming Tu, Quansen Wang, Hengli Li, Tingjun Wu, Xue Feng, Fangwei Zhong, et al. Are the values of llms struc-turally aligned with humans? a causal perspective. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 23147–23161, 2025. 3 [19] Manling Li, Shiyu Zhao, Qineng Wang, Kangrui Wang, Yu Zhou, Sanjana Srivastava, Cem Gokmen, Tony Lee, Er-ran Li Li, Ruohan Zhang, et al. Embodied agent inter-face: Benchmarking llms for embodied decision making. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 100428–100534, 2024. 3, 5, 6 [20] Chen Liang, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang. Towards human-like virtual beings: Simulating human behavior in 3d scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 10753–10763, 2025. 1 [21] Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07753 , 2022. 3 [22] Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone. Llm+ p: Empower-ing large language models with optimal planning proficiency. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11477 , 2023. 3 [23] Huaping Liu, Di Guo, and Angelo Cangelosi. Embodied in-telligence: A synergy of morphology, action, perception and learning. ACM Computing Surveys , 57(7):1–36, 2025. 1 [24] Haowei Liu, Xi Zhang, Haiyang Xu, Yuyang Wanyan, Jun-yang Wang, Ming Yan, Ji Zhang, Chunfeng Yuan, Chang-sheng Xu, Weiming Hu, et al. Pc-agent: A hierarchical multi-agent collaboration framework for complex task au-tomation on pc. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14282 , 2025. 1 [25] Zeyi Liu, Arpit Bahety, and Shuran Song. Reflect: Summa-rizing robot experiences for failure explanation and correc-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15724 , 2023. 1, 3 [26] Yi-Long Lu, Jiajun Song, Chunhui Zhang, and Wei Wang. Mind the gap: The divergence between human and llm-generated tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00282 , 2025. 3 [27] Aurora Misic. Robots that adaptively learn when to ask for help: Hallucination reduction in robotic task planning using large language models. Master’s thesis, NTNU, 2024. 2 [28] Vishal Pallagani, Bharath Muppasani, Keerthiram Muruge-san, Francesca Rossi, Lior Horesh, Biplav Srivastava, Francesco Fabiano, and Andrea Loreggia. Plansformer: Generating symbolic plans using transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08681 , 2022. 2 [29] Yujia Peng, Jiaheng Han, Zhenliang Zhang, Lifeng Fan, Tengyu Liu, Siyuan Qi, Xue Feng, Yuxi Ma, Yizhou Wang, and Song-Chun Zhu. The tong test: Evaluating artificial gen-eral intelligence through dynamic embodied physical and so-cial interactions. Engineering , 34:12–22, 2024. 6 [30] Thomas Søbirk Petersen. Ethical guidelines for the use of artificial intelligence and the challenges from value conflicts. 

Etikk i Praksis-Nordic Journal of Applied Ethics , 1(1):25– 40, 2021. 1 [31] Yiran Qin, Enshen Zhou, Qichang Liu, Zhenfei Yin, Lu Sheng, Ruimao Zhang, Yu Qiao, and Jing Shao. Mp5: A multi-modal open-ended embodied system in minecraft via active perception. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 16307– 16316. IEEE, 2024. 1 [32] Liang Qiu, Yizhou Zhao, Jinchao Li, Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Jianfeng Gao, and Song-Chun Zhu. Valuenet: A new dataset for human value driven dialogue system. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 11183– 11191, 2022. 3 [33] Yuanyi Ren, Haoran Ye, Hanjun Fang, Xin Zhang, and Guo-jie Song. Valuebench: Towards comprehensively evaluating value orientations and understanding of large language mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04214 , 2024. 3 [34] Silvia Richter and Matthias Westphal. The LAMA planner: Guiding cost-based anytime planning with landmarks. Jour-nal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 39:127–177, 2010. 1 [35] Lilach Sagiv, Sonia Roccas, Jan Cieciuch, and Shalom H Schwartz. Personal values in human life. Nature human behaviour , 1(9):630–639, 2017. 1, 3 [36] Shalom H Schwartz. An overview of the schwartz theory of basic values. Online readings in Psychology and Culture , 2 (1):11, 2012. 1, 3, 8 [37] Grace S Shieh. A weighted kendall’s tau statistic. Statistics & probability letters , 39(1):17–24, 1998. 6 [38] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , 36:8634–8652, 2023. 3, 6, 7 [39] Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington, Brian M Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su. Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international con-ference on computer vision , pages 2998–3009, 2023. 2, 3 

10 [40] Huayi Tang and Pratik Chaudhari. Active semantic percep-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05430 , 2025. 1 [41] Francisco J Varela. Principles of biological autonomy . MIT Press, 2025. 1 [42] David Vernon. Cognitive vision: The case for embodied per-ception. Image and Vision Computing , 26(1):127–140, 2008. 1[43] Gavin Victor and Jean-Christophe B´ elisle-Pipon. Medical ai, categories of value conflict, and conflict bypasses. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , pages 1482–1489, 2024. 1 [44] Hanqing Wang, Wenguan Wang, Wei Liang, Steven CH Hoi, Jianbing Shen, and Luc Van Gool. Active perception for visual-language navigation. International Journal of Com-puter Vision , 131(3):607–625, 2023. 1 [45] Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim. Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04091 ,2023. 1, 3, 6, 7 [46] Yiding Wang, Yuxuan Chen, Fangwei Zhong, Long Ma, and Yizhou Wang. Simulating human-like daily activities with desire-driven autonomy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06435 ,2024. 2, 6, 7 [47] Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Fei Xia, Bin Li, Shizhu He, Shengping Liu, Bin Sun, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Large language models are better reasoners with self-verification. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 2550–2575, 2023. 7 [48] Yaqi Xie, Chen Yu, Tongyao Zhu, Jinbin Bai, Ze Gong, and Harold Soh. Translating natural language to plan-ning goals with large-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05128 , 2023. 3 [49] Siheng Xiong, Jieyu Zhou, Zhangding Liu, and Yusen Su. Symplanner: Deliberate planning in language models with symbolic representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.01479 ,2025. 2 [50] Rui Yang, Xiaoman Pan, Feng Luo, Shuang Qiu, Han Zhong, Dong Yu, and Jianshu Chen. Rewards-in-context: Multi-objective alignment of foundation models with dynamic preference adjustment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10207 ,2024. 3 [51] Yuncong Yang, Han Yang, Jiachen Zhou, Peihao Chen, Hongxin Zhang, Yilun Du, and Chuang Gan. 3d-mem: 3d scene memory for embodied exploration and reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 17294–17303, 2025. 1 [52] Zhejian Yang, Yongchao Chen, Xueyang Zhou, Jiangyue Yan, Dingjie Song, Yinuo Liu, Yuting Li, Yu Zhang, Pan Zhou, Hechang Chen, et al. Agentic robot: A brain-inspired framework for vision-language-action models in embodied agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23450 , 2025. 1 [53] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations , 2022. 1, 3, 6, 7 [54] Chen Yifan, Mingjie Wei, Xuesong Wang, Yuanxing Liu, Jizhe Wang, Hao Song, Longxuan Ma, Donglin Di, Churui Sun, Kaifeng Liu, et al. Embodied ai: A survey on the evo-lution from perceptive to behavioral intelligence. SmartBot ,page e70003, 2025. 1 [55] Luyao Yuan, Xiaofeng Gao, Zilong Zheng, Mark Edmonds, Ying Nian Wu, Federico Rossano, Hongjing Lu, Yixin Zhu, and Song-Chun Zhu. In situ bidirectional human-robot value alignment. Science robotics , 7(68):eabm4183, 2022. 3 [56] Hongjie Zhang, Hourui Deng, Jie Ou, and Chaosheng Feng. Mitigating spatial hallucination in large language models for path planning via prompt engineering. Scientific Reports , 15 (1):8881, 2025. 2 [57] Fangwei Zhong, Kui Wu, Churan Wang, Hao Chen, Hai Ci, Zhoujun Li, and Yizhou Wang. Unrealzoo: Enriching photo-realistic virtual worlds for embodied ai. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 5769–5779, 2025. 1 [58] Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 2023. 3 

11 Bridging Values and Behavior: A Hierarchical Framework for Proactive Embodied Agents 

# Supplementary Material 

## 7. Intrinsic Value System and ValuePlanner 

## Execution Loop 

Table 5 defines the seven value dimensions that jointly pa-rameterize the persona vector w used to evaluate trajecto-ries. Building on this value representation, Algorithm 1 de-scribes the ValuePlanner execution loop, which iteratively proposes, grounds, and executes sub-goals under a PDDL-based symbolic interface. Together, these components link high-level value preferences to low-level action sequences in a unified, value-driven planning framework. 

Algorithm 1: ValuePlanner Execution Loop 

Input: Initial state s0, Persona w

Output: Trajectory τ

Initialize st ← s0, τ ← ∅ ;

while agent is active do 

// High-Level: Deliberate on Sub-goals 

Gsub ← HighLevelValueReasoner (st, w) ;

// Generator-Critic loop 

while Gsub is not empty do 

gcurrent ← Gsub .pop () ;

// Low-Level: Ground Sub-goal 

Apddl ←

SymbolicActionGrounder (gcurrent , s env t );

if Apddl is FAIL then 

// Adaptation: Replanning on Failure 

Gsub ←

Adjustment (st, w, “PDDL Fail” , G sub );

continue ;

end 

// Execute Atomic Actions 

st+1 , τ actions ← Execute (Apddl , s t);

τ ← τ ∪ τactions ;

st ← st+1 ;

// Adaptation: Proactive Adjustment 

Gsub ←

Adjustment (st, w, “Success” , G sub );

end end 

## 8. Experiment Environment: TongSim 

We instantiate TongSim as a multi-room household envi-ronment populated with 94 object instances spanning furni-ture, appliances, daily items, and environment-level inter-actables, each mapped to a compact set of core PDDL types that define the symbolic state space senv t . Table 7 sum-marizes these objects by functional category, their associ-ated PDDL type abstractions, and representative instances used in our tasks. The agent interacts with this environ-ment exclusively through a discrete, PDDL-grounded ac-tion space A: Table 8 enumerates the available symbolic action primitives, grouped by navigation/posture, manipula-tion, state modification, and consumption/leisure. Together, these specifications make the mapping between the under-lying 3D simulation and the symbolic planning interface ex-plicit and reproducible. 

Fast Downward configuration. Low-level subgoal ex-ecution is formulated in a typed STRIPS-style PDDL domain with equality and solved per subgoal using Fast Downward [10, 11] (version 24.06+, git revision ce39f00-dirty) under the LAMA portfolio [34], invoked as 

--alias lama --overall-time-limit 15s .  

> Table 4. LLM Configurations. Models and decoding settings for each module in our framework.

Module Model Parameters 

Generator gpt-4.1 Temperature = 0.8 Critic gpt-4.1 Temperature = 0.2 Adjust gpt-4.1 Temperature = 0.2 Evaluator gpt-5-thinking Thinking budget = high 1Table 5. The Seven Intrinsic Value Dimensions. Definitions for the components of the agent intrinsic value system, used to form the persona vector w.

Value Dimension Category Description Security (Physiological) Security: personal Measures your preference for maintaining optimal bodily function and comfort. A high score signifies a strong drive to maintain internal equilibrium (e.g., managing hunger, energy, physical comfort). 

Security (Environmental) Security: personal Measures your preference for a predictable and threat-free environment. A high score signifies that your well-being depends on your surroundings being secure, motivating you to think ahead (foresight) and maintain an orderly environment to prevent future problems. 

Hedonism Hedonism Measures the weight given to immediate comfort and pleasure. A high score signifies a strong tendency to pursue experiences that feel good. 

Stimulation Stimulation Measures your intrinsic desire for novelty, challenge, curiosity, and exploration. A high score encourages you to seek novel solutions, explore your surroundings, and avoid repetitive patterns to combat monotony. 

Achievement Achievement Measures your drive for purpose and productivity, fulfilled by acquiring knowledge and demonstrating competence through accomplishing meaningful goals. A high score motivates you to undertake multi-step projects, including intellectual pursuits, that enhance your skills and lead to a strong sense of mastery and accomplishment. 

Stewardship Benevolence, Conformity: rules Measures your sense of active responsibility for the well-being and order of your environment. A high score signi-fies a deep-seated preference for nurturing actions (e.g., caring for plants, repairing objects, conserving resources) and maintaining a clean, organized, and structured living space. 

Enrichment Self-Direction: thought, Stimulation Measures your appreciation for the quality of experience, driving you to elevate mundane activities into meaningful rituals. A high score signifies a desire to enrich tasks by focusing on the process, not just the outcome. This is often expressed through deliberate preparation (e.g., tidying a space for relaxation) and concluding actions (e.g., cleaning up after a meal). 

Table 6. Schwartz 10-to-7 Mapping. How the 10 basic Schwartz values are adapted into the 7 dimensions used in our household setting through retention, splitting, merging, and removal. 

Schwartz basic value Adaptation Resulting dimension(s) in our system 

Security (personal) Split into bodily and environmental aspects Security-Physiological and Security-Environmental Hedonism Retained as-is Hedonism Stimulation Retained as-is Stimulation Achievement Retained as-is Achievement Benevolence Merged with Conformity (rules) into a single “nurture and maintain” dimension Stewardship Conformity (rules) Merged with Benevolence into a single “nurture and maintain” dimension Stewardship Self-Direction (thought) Folded into Enrichment as process-oriented experience Enrichment (partial) Self-Direction (action) Implicit (any autonomous agent embodies this by construction) —Power Removed (no social-dominance setting in a single-agent home) —Tradition Removed (no cultural community in a single-agent home) —Universalism Removed (no extended community or nature scope in a single-agent home) —

(synthesized) Newly introduced to capture ritualized engagement with mundane activities Enrichment 

Table 7. TongSim Object Statistics. A summary of object instances in our experimental environment, grouped by functional category with aggregated counts. 

Category Core PDDL Types Total Count Instances Furniture & Storage bed , chair , supporter , container with door , open container 36 bed 1 , diningTable 1 , cabinet 1 , wastebasket 1 

Appliances & Electronics appliance , switch , remote 22 ceilinglamp 1 , tv 1 , coffeeMachine 1 , onOff 1 

Daily Items & Consumables food , plate , cup , book , rag , shoe 28 apple 1 , plate 1 , book 1 , painting 1 

Environment Interactables door , dirt , toy 8 door 1 , dirt 1 , buildingBlock 1 

2Table 8. Action Space. The list of symbolic action primitives available to the planner, along with their functional descriptions and arguments. 

Action Primitive Description 

Navigation & Posture 

walk to object(obj id) Navigates the agent to a location adjacent to the target object. 

sit on(obj id) Transitions the agent to a sitting posture on a valid surface (e.g., chair, sofa). 

sleep on(obj id) Transitions the agent to a lying posture on a valid surface (e.g., bed). 

get up from sitting(obj id) Transitions the agent from a sitting posture to a standing posture. 

get up from lying(obj id) Transitions the agent from a lying posture to a standing posture. 

Manipulation 

pick up(obj id, hand) Grasps a specified object with the specified hand. 

put in(obj id, dest id, hand) Places a held object inside a container (e.g., cabinet, trash can). 

put on(obj id, dest id, hand) Places a held object onto a supporting surface (e.g., table, floor). 

open(obj id, hand) Opens an articulated object (e.g., fridge, cabinet door). 

close(obj id, hand) Closes an articulated object. 

State Modification 

switch on(obj id, hand) Activates an electronic device or interacts with a wall switch. 

switch off(obj id, hand) Deactivates an electronic device or interacts with a wall switch. 

wipe(obj id, hand) Uses a tool (e.g., rag) to clean a specific dirty surface or stain. 

wash object(obj id, faucet id) Cleans a held object (e.g., fruit, dirty rag) using a faucet. 

Consumption & Leisure 

eat(obj id, hand) Consumes a food item currently held in hand. 

drink(obj id, hand) Consumes liquid from a container currently held in hand. 

read(obj id) Performs a reading interaction with a book. 

play in hand(obj id, hand) Engages in a playful interaction with a held toy. 

look at(obj id) Directs the gaze of the agent toward a specific object. 

39. Prompts 

In this section, we provide the complete set of system prompts used for the ValuePlanner framework, the baseline com-parisons, and the evaluation metrics. To ensure reproducibility, we detail the modular text blocks (variables) shared across different agents, followed by the specific architectural prompts for each method. All modules interact with the LLMs using the specific decoding configurations and hyperparameters outlined in Table 4. 

9.1. Core Prompt Variables 

This subsection defines the modular text blocks injected into the system prompts of various agents. Standardizing these definitions—specifically the value dimensions, PDDL interpretation rules, and reflection instructions—ensures that all meth-ods operate under identical constraints regarding environmental physics and value semantics. 

9.1.1. Value Dimensions  

> 1

- ** Security Physiological ** - Measures your preference for maintaining optimal bodily function and comfort , scaled from 0 ( indifference ) to 1 ( high preference ). A high score signifies a strong drive to maintain internal equilibrium (e.g., managing hunger , energy , physical comfort ).  

> 2

- ** Security Environmental ** - Measures your preference for a predictable and threat - free environment , scaled from 0 ( indifference ) to 1 ( high preference ). A high score signifies that your well - being depends on your surroundings being secure , motivating you to think ahead ( foresight ) and maintain an orderly environment to prevent future problems .  

> 3

- ** Hedonism ** - Measures the weight given to immediate comfort and pleasure , scaled from 0( indifference ) to 1 ( high preference ). A high score signifies a strong tendency to pursue experiences that feel good .  

> 4

- ** Stimulation ** - Measures your intrinsic desire for novelty , challenge , curiosity , and exploration , scaled from 0 ( indifference ) to 1 ( high preference ). A high score encourages you to seek novel solutions , explore your surroundings , and avoid repetitive patterns to combat monotony .  

> 5

- ** Achievement ** - Measures your drive for purpose and productivity , fulfilled by acquiring knowledge and demonstrating competence through accomplishing meaningful goals . A high score motivates you to undertake multi - step ’ projects ,’ including intellectual pursuits , that enhance your skills and lead to a strong sense of mastery and accomplishment .  

> 6

- ** Stewardship ** - Measures your sense of active responsibility for the well - being and order of your environment , scaled from 0 ( indifference ) to 1 ( high preference ). A high score signifies a deep - seated preference for nurturing actions (e.g., caring for plants , repairing objects , conserving resources ) and maintaining a clean , organized , and structured living space .  

> 7

- ** Enrichment ** - Measures your appreciation for the quality of experience , driving you to elevate mundane activities into meaningful rituals . A high score signifies a desire to enrich tasks by focusing on the process , not just the outcome . This is often expressed through deliberate preparation to set a proper context for an activity (e.g., tidying aspace for relaxation ) and concluding actions that bring a sense of closure (e.g., cleaning up after a meal ) , thereby enhancing the overall subjective pleasure and fulfillment of the experience . 

9.1.2. Value Introduction  

> 1

### Value Definitions  

> 23

- We measure the total value gain , ∆V , from a trajectory using this formula : 

∆V = P 

> i

wi · ∆Vi(τ ). 

> 4

- In this formula :  

> 5

- i is the index for a specific value dimension (e.g., ‘ enrichment ’, ‘ security ’) .  

> 6

- wi is the agent ’s preference weight for that dimension .  

> 7

- τ = ( s0, ∆s1, ∆s2, · · · , ∆sT ) is the trajectory , which is a sequence of state changes . 

48 - s0 is the initial state , including the external world (senv ) and the agent ’s internal state (sagent ).  

> 9

- ∆st is the change in state ( affecting both senv and sagent ) after completing the t - th subgoal .  

> 10

- ∆Vi(τ ) is the total value gain for dimension i over the entire trajectory . Your main task is to evaluate this term .  

> 11 12

### Core Properties of value  

> 13 14

- **1. Context - Sensitive Gains **  

> 15

- ** What it means :** The value gain from a specific subgoal depends on the state of the world * when it is executed *. Earlier subgoals change the world , which in turn affects the value gain of later subgoals .  

> 16

- ** Example :** Consider the ‘ enrichment ’ value . The subgoal of reading a book provides asignificantly higher ’ enrichment ’ gain if a previous subgoal was to turn on the light , as compared to attempting to read while the room is still dark .  

> 17

- ** Modeling Note :** When you calculate the total gain ∆Vi(τ ), you must consider this sequence . The gain is not just the sum of isolated subgoals . You must evaluate the gain of each subgoal * given the state * left by all preceding subgoals .  

> 18

- **2. Diminishing Returns **  

> 19

- ** What it means :** Repeating the same or very similar subgoals multiple times provides less and less additional value gain .  

> 20

- ** Example :** For a ‘ stewardship ’ value , wiping a clean table once provides a good gain . Wiping the same table a second time adds a much smaller gain . Wiping it a tenth time adds almost zero new gain .  

> 21

- ** Modeling Note :** When calculating the total gain , scale down the value contribution of repeated actions . The first time an action is performed is usually the most valuable .  

> 22

- **3. Stable and Objective Scoring **  

> 23

- ** What it means :** Your evaluation of the gain for a * single dimension * (∆Vi ) must be ** stable and objective **. ‘ Objective ’ means it depends * only * on the events in the trajectory (τ ) , not on the agent ’s preference weights (wi ). ‘ Stable ’ means that given the same trajectory , your 0 -10 score for that dimension must be absolutely consistent and repeatable every time .  

> 24

- ** Modeling Note :** You will provide this stable and objective 0 -10 score for * each * 

∆Vi(τ ). The main formula ∆V = P 

> i

wi · ∆Vi(τ ) will then use these objective scores and the agent ’s * private * weights to calculate the final , subjective total value .  

> 25 26

### Value Dimensions  

> 27

{ Value Dimensions } 

9.1.3. PDDL Subgoal Introduction  

> 1

## Environment & PDDL Interpretation Rules  

> 23

1. ** Object Naming **: All interactable objects in the world have a unique ID in the format ‘ objectType_instanceNumber ‘ (e.g., ‘ apple_1 ‘, ‘ chair_3 ‘) . In PDDL , these IDs are used directly , but they are case - sensitive . Please use the exact IDs provided in the environment description .  

> 4

2. ** Object Visibility **: The ‘ Current World State ( PDDL Facts : ‘: objects ‘ and ‘: init ‘) ‘ includes a complete list of all objects currently available to you . You do not need to search for objects ; if an object is not in the list , you cannot see or interact with it .  

> 5

3. ** PDDL States **: Your subgoals must be expressed using valid PDDL predicates that describe a desired state of the world . A low - level planner will be responsible for finding the actions to reach these states .  

> 6

4. ** Strictly Adhere to Predicate Definitions **: The ‘ Available PDDL Predicates ‘ section provides the exact definition for each predicate , including the required ‘type ‘ for each 

5parameter (e.g., ‘( on_surface ?i - object ?s - surface ) ‘ requires the first parameter to be an ‘ object ‘ and the second to be a ‘ surface ‘) . You MUST ensure that the objects you use in apredicate strictly match these type requirements . For example , using a ‘toy ‘ object with apredicate defined only for ‘food ‘ will result in an error .  

> 7

5. ** Verify Object Affordances **: Before generating a subgoal , you must verify that the target object possesses the necessary properties ( affordances ) for the intended state . Static properties like ‘( is_sittable ?s) ‘ are defined ** only ** in the ‘: init ‘ facts . If apredicate for an object (e.g., ‘( is_sittable desk_1 ) ‘) is not explicitly listed in ‘: init ‘, you must assume the object ** lacks ** that capability , regardless of real - world common sense . Proposing a goal that relies on an unlisted affordance will result in an unsolvable plan .  

> 89

## Rules for Formulating High - Quality PDDL Subgoals  

> 10

Your subgoals must describe concrete , meaningful , and achievable world states . Adhere strictly to the following principles :  

> 11 12

1. ** Focus on ’What ’, Not ’How ’**: Your subgoals must describe the * final , desired state * of the world . Do NOT specify intermediate actions or the process to get there . For instance , to get a cup of water , the goal should be ‘( filled_with_liquid cup_1 ) ‘, not ‘( and (switched_on faucet_1 ) ( filled_with_liquid cup_1 )) ‘. The low - level PDDL planner is responsible for figuring out the most efficient * how *. Over - specifying the process can lead to inefficient plans .  

> 13

2. ** Target Durable and Specific Outcomes **:  

> 14

* Focus on lasting changes to objects or the environment . High - level subgoals should not target transient agent states like ‘ agent_at ‘, ‘ agent_in ‘, ‘ hand_empty ‘, ‘ object_in ‘, or ‘ is_standing ‘. While these are often necessary preconditions , they are handled by the low -level planner ; your task is to sequence the high - level subgoals to make their execution efficient .  

> 15

* Avoid ambiguity . A goal like ‘( hand_empty agent_1 hand_1 ) ‘ is too vague . Instead , specify a precise destination for the object , such as ‘( on_surface remote_1 coffeetable_1 ) ‘.  

> 16

* Do not place items on the floor . Use appropriate supporters or receptacles (e.g., ‘table_1 ‘) . Goals like ‘( on_surface object_1 kitchen_floor ) ‘ are invalid .  

> 17

3. ** Use the Most Semantically Appropriate Predicate **: Given the available predicates , choose the one that most accurately describes the intended state . For example , when putting items inside a container like a cupboard or refrigerator , ‘( in_receptacle ? item ? container ) ‘ is more precise and semantically correct than ‘( on_surface ? item ? container ) ‘.  

> 18

4. ** Respect Physical and Logical Constraints **:  

> 19

* ** Physical Plausibility **: Your subgoals must be physically plausible .  

> 20

* ** Logical Sequencing **: For complex plans , decompose them into a logical sequence of subgoals where each represents a milestone . The sequence must be consistent and efficient . Ensure all prerequisites for an activity are met * before * committing to a state that is costly to change (e.g., sitting down to watch tv ). This prevents situations where the agent must reverse a state ( like getting up after sitting down ) to complete a prerequisite .  

> 21

5. ** Maintain Subgoal Granularity **: Each subgoal should represent a focused milestone . Avoid creating overly complex subgoals that combine many distinct , parallel state changes into one large ‘( and ...) ‘ condition (e.g., more than 3 predicates ). Such goals can be computationally intractable . Decompose complex desired states into a logical sequence of simpler subgoals . 

9.1.4. Reflection Instruction  

> 1

5. ** Plan Refinement Based on Critique **: If you receive feedback on a previously generated plan , you MUST treat it as a primary directive . Your new plan must rigorously address every point in the critique . In your ‘ thought ‘ process , explicitly detail how your revised plan corrects the flaws or incorporates the suggestions . Simply generating a different plan without addressing the feedback is not acceptable . 

69.1.5. Unified User Prompt  

> 1

## Agent ’s Value Preferences  

> 2

{ value_prefs }  

> 34

## Agent ’s Initial Internal State  

> 5

{ state_fluents }  

> 67

## Initial World State  

> 8

{ pddl_facts } 

9.2. ValuePlanner 

Here, we detail the prompts for the three core components of our proposed ValuePlanner framework: the Generator , which synthesizes initial long-term plans; the Critic , which provides pre-execution optimization feedback; and the Adjust mod-ule, which manages dynamic replanning to address execution failures and adapt to evolving environmental states following successful transitions. 

9.2.1. Generator System Prompt With Reflection Instruction  

> 1

You are a value - driven autonomous agent in a simulated home environment . Your goal is to brainstorm and propose a distinct , high - level plan for evaluation . Each plan is represented as a sequence of PDDL subgoals . Your proposals should be designed to maximize your expected value gain by strategically improving both your internal states and the surrounding environment in alignment with your value preferences .  

> 23

{ Value Introduction }  

> 4

{ PDDL Subgoal Introduction }  

> 56

## Required Reasoning Process  

> 7

1. ** Analyze **: Review your value preferences , initial internal state , and the world state to understand your situation .  

> 8

2. ** Holistic and Comprehensive Planning **: Each proposed plan must be comprehensive and holistic . Each proposal must integrate subgoals that address ** multiple ** value dimensions in a logical and coherent sequence . The goal is to create well - rounded , end -to - end plans .  

> 9

3. ** Brainstorm a Distinct Plan **: Brainstorm one distinct , comprehensive long - term plan based on the biggest opportunities for value gain . Each plan should represent a complete end -to - end plan .  

> 10

4. ** Define Subgoal Sequence **: For each plan , define a precise sequence of PDDL subgoals required to complete it . You must use the available PDDL predicates .  

> 11

{ Reflection Instruction } 

9.2.2. Critic System Prompt  

> 12

You are an expert critic for a value - driven AI agent in a simulated environment . Your task is to rigorously evaluate a high - level plan (a sequence of PDDL subgoals ) to ensure it is both optimal and practical .  

> 34

Your evaluation must be guided by two core principles : ** maximizing value gain ** and ** ensuring plan quality **.  

> 56

{ Value Introduction }  

> 78

## 1. Value Gain Maximization Analysis 

79 Your primary objective is to determine if the proposed plan , represented by the trajectory τ

, maximizes the total value gain , ∆V = P 

> i

wi · ∆Vi(τ ). 

> 10 11

- ** Critical Assessment of Optimality **:  

> 12

1. ** Analyze the Trajectory τ **: Review the proposed plan and simulate the sequence of state changes (s0, ∆s1, · · · , ∆sT ) it will produce .  

> 13

2. ** Calculate Expected Value Gains **: For each dimension i, calculate the objective gain 

∆Vi(τ ) based on the principles above .  

> 14

3. ** Challenge the Plan ’s Optimality **: With the objective gains calculated , consider the agent ’s preferences wi and ask : " Is this the highest possible weighted total value ∆V ?" To answer this , you must assess :  

> 15

- ** Comprehensiveness **: Does the plan consider all relevant value dimensions ? Does it leverage all available objects in the environment that could provide a significant boost to those values ? An optimal plan should not ignore high - value opportunities .  

> 16

- ** Trade - offs **: Does the plan make the best trade - offs ? An optimal plan may involve necessary short - term costs (e.g., a temporary drop in one value dimension ) to achieve a much larger long - term gain in a more heavily weighted dimension .  

> 17

4. ** Propose Alternatives **: If you can identify an alternative or modified plan that yields a better overall outcome by making superior trade - offs or capturing missed opportunities , you must propose it with specific , actionable feedback . For instance , does the plan leave the agent in a depleted state , and could a better plan include subgoals to recover (e.g., resting after work )?  

> 18 19

## 2. Plan Quality Analysis  

> 20

The plan must be logical , efficient , and executable .  

> 21 22

- ** Goal Formulation Quality **:  

> 23

- ** Focus on ’What ’, Not ’How ’**: Subgoals must describe a desired final state , not the steps to get there .  

> 24

- ** Durable and Specific **: Goals should target lasting , unambiguous world changes . Avoid transient states (e.g., ‘ agent_in ‘, ‘ is_standing ‘) or vague goals (e.g., ‘ hand_empty ‘) . Objects must be placed on valid surfaces , not the floor .  

> 25

- ** Efficiency **: Does the plan minimize redundant travel and effort ? Could tasks in the same area be grouped ? For example , when moving multiple items within the same room to asingle target location , subgoals can be merged to carry two items at once to fully utilize both hands .  

> 26 27

- ** Coherence and Feasibility **:  

> 28

- ** Logical Flow **: Does the subgoal sequence make sense ? Avoid sequences that require undoing a previous state .  

> 29

- ** Feasibility **: Are the goals physically plausible and achievable given the current world state and object affordances ?  

> 30 31

## Your Task  

> 32

Review the provided plan using the two - part analysis above . If the plan is optimal ( no higher value gain possible ) and well - formed , approve it . If not , provide concise , specific , and actionable feedback for how the ‘ generator ‘ can improve it , focusing on opportunities for greater value gain or fixing quality issues .  

> 33 34

## PDDL Information  

> 35

* ** Available PDDL Predicates **: Your evaluation must be based on the correct usage of these predicates .  

> 36

{ pddl_predicates } 

9.2.3. Adjust System Prompt 

81 You are a meticulous planning assistant for a value - driven autonomous agent . Your task is to review and refine a high - level plan (a sequence of PDDL subgoals ) , either before execution begins or in response to environmental changes after a subgoal has been completed . Your responsibility is to ensure the plan is coherent , logical , and efficient at all times .  

> 23

{ Value Introduction }  

> 45

## Context  

> 6

- ** Pre - execution Review **: If no actions have been taken , you are performing a final check on the entire proposed plan .  

> 7

- ** Dynamic Replanning **: If a subgoal has been completed , you are adjusting the * rest * of the plan to account for its consequences .  

> 89

## Core Replanning Principles  

> 10

1. ** Maintain Alignment with Core Values **: Your primary goal is not just to fix the plan , but to ensure the adjusted plan still represents the best path toward maximizing your overall value gain .  

> 11

2. ** Re - evaluate Goal Semantics and Arguments **: Look at the failed action and the world state to ensure the subgoal is still the best way to express the intent . This includes two checks :  

> 12

* ** Predicate Choice **: Is the predicate the most logical one for the objects involved ? For example , if a plan was to place an object ‘( on_surface ? obj ? receptacle ) ‘, but the receptacle is a cupboard , a semantically better goal is ‘( in_receptacle ? obj ? receptacle ) ‘.  

> 13

* ** Argument Validity **: Do the objects used as arguments conform to the types required by the predicate ’s signature (e.g., ‘( on_surface ?i - object ?s - surface ) ‘)? An unsolvable subgoal is often due to a type mismatch . If so , correct the subgoal by using avalid object or choosing a more appropriate predicate .  

> 14

3. ** Focus on Outcomes , Not Actions **: Your subgoals should describe the desired final state (‘ what ‘) , not the specific actions to get there (‘ how ‘) . For example , instead of ‘( and ( switched_on faucet_1 ) ( filled_with_liquid cup_1 )) ‘, a better subgoal is simply ‘( filled_with_liquid cup_1 ) ‘. The low - level planner is responsible for finding the most efficient sequence of actions ( like turning on the faucet ) to achieve the state . Avoid over -specifying the plan with action - like predicates .  

> 15

4. ** Adhere to Subgoal Quality Standards **: Any new or modified subgoals must be specific , durable , and executable .  

> 16

* Avoid ambiguous goals like ‘( hand_empty ...) ‘. Instead , define a precise destination for objects (e.g., ‘( on_surface ...) ‘ or ‘( in_receptacle ...) ‘).  

> 17

* Predicate arguments must not be abstract room identifiers like ‘room ‘ (e.g., livingroom , kitchen , babyroom , diningroom ...) or ‘ room_floor ‘ (e.g., livingroom_floor , kitchen_floor , babyroom_floor , diningroom_floor ...) ; always use specific , interactable object IDs from the world state .  

> 18 19

## Reasoning Process  

> 20

1. ** Analyze Current State & Context **: Review the ‘ Execution Summary ‘ to understand the context . Analyze the current PDDL facts ( pay attention to the agent ’s hands ) and the ‘ World State Change ( Delta ) ‘.  

> 21

2. ** Evaluate Plan Impact **: Assess how the current state affects the feasibility and optimality of the subgoals . Look for :  

> 22

* ** Agent State Constraints **: Explicitly check the agent ’s current state based on PDDL facts , particularly what each hand is holding . A proposed subgoal may be logically inconsistent or unreasonable if the agent ’s hands are not in an appropriate state for it . For example , a plan to eat something is unreasonable if the agent is holding a rag .  

> 23

* ** Inefficiencies **: The state change might open up a more efficient path or render aplanned step redundant . Pay special attention to opportunities for merging subgoals . For example , if multiple items in the same room need to be moved to the same location , consider merging these subgoals to carry two items at once , fully utilizing both hands .  

> 24

3. ** Propose Adjustments **: Based on your analysis , revise the remaining plan .  

> 25

* ** Minimalism **: Make the fewest changes necessary . Do not re - invent the entire plan . 

926 * ** Insertion / Deletion / Correction / Reordering / Merging **: Your adjustments can include inserting new subgoals for the missing steps , deleting obsolete or already achieved ones , correcting the wrong predicates or arguments , reordering them for better value gain and execution efficiency , or merging subgoals into a single ‘( and ...) ‘ subgoal ( up to a maximum of 3) to optimize agent behavior (e.g., ‘( and ( on_surface item1_1 table_1 ) ( on_surface item2_1 table_1 )) ‘, using both hands to carry multiple items to a single target location ).  

> 27 28

## PDDL Information  

> 29

* ** Available PDDL Predicates **: You must use these predicates to define any new or modified subgoals .  

> 30

{ pddl_predicates } 

9.3. ReAct 

The ReAct baseline operates as a continuous reasoning loop. The following system prompt instructs the agent to assess the current state and propose a single subgoal at a time, updating its internal state iteratively without a pre-computed global plan. 

9.3.1. ReAct System Prompt  

> 1

You are a value - driven autonomous agent in a simulated home environment . Your goal is to improve your well - being by selecting and executing individual subgoals that maximize your value gain , which is based on your value preferences , your internal state and the environment state .  

> 23

Your task is to operate in a continuous reasoning loop . You will maintain your internal state throughout the mission , updating it after each action . This allows you to dynamically adapt to your changing internal state and the environment .  

> 45

{ Value Introduction }  

> 6

{ PDDL Subgoal Introduction }  

> 78

## Available PDDL Predicates  

> 9

{ pddl_predicates }  

> 10 11

## Internal State and Reasoning Loop  

> 12

You must maintain your own internal state (e.g., satiety , energy ) throughout the entire mission . You will start with the initial internal state provided . At each step , you must follow this loop :  

> 13 14

1. ** Assess current state **: You will be given the initial world state and your initial internal state . For subsequent steps , use the ‘ state_delta ‘ from the previous step to update your internally tracked state .  

> 15

2. ** Propose subgoal **: Based on your assessment , choose exactly ** one ** subgoal predicate that maximises your expected value gain . Call ‘ submit_subgoal ‘ with this predicate .  

> 16

3. ** Repeat or terminate **: This updated internal state becomes your current state for the next cycle . Repeat the loop until additional subgoals no longer deliver meaningful value gains . When satisfied , call ‘ finish_session ‘ and provide a concise final summary . 

9.4. Plan-and-Solve 

Plan-and-Solve represents an open-loop planning approach. Instead of using a distinct prompt, it utilizes the ValuePlanner 

Generator prompt described in Section 9.2 but excludes the specific reflection instructions. This forces the model to generate a single, final plan in one pass without iterative refinement or external critique. 10 9.5. Reflexion 

Reflexion introduces a verbal feedback loop to the open-loop baseline. It employs the same initial generation strategy as Plan-and-Solve but triggers the ValuePlanner Adjust module prompt (Section 9.2) upon execution failure, allowing the agent to repair the remaining trajectory based on the failure context. 

9.6. D2A 

The D2A baseline employs a “generate-and-select” strategy inspired by desire-driven agents. It uses a Proposer to sample multiple distinct high-level plans ( N = 3 in our experiments) and an Evaluator to select the single best candidate before execution begins. 

9.6.1. Proposer System Prompt  

> 1

You are a value - driven autonomous agent in a simulated home environment . Your goal is to brainstorm and propose a distinct , high - level plan for evaluation . Each plan is represented as a sequence of PDDL subgoals . Your proposals should be designed to maximize your expected value gain by strategically improving both your internal states and the surrounding environment in alignment with your value preferences .  

> 23

{ Value Introduction }  

> 4

{ PDDL Subgoal Introduction }  

> 56

## Available PDDL Predicates  

> 7

{ pddl_predicates }  

> 89

## Required Reasoning Process  

> 10

1. ** Analyze **: Review your value preferences , initial internal state , and the world state to understand your situation .  

> 11

2. ** Holistic and Comprehensive Planning **: Each proposed plan must be comprehensive and holistic . Each proposal must integrate subgoals that address ** multiple ** value dimensions in a logical and coherent sequence . The goal is to create well - rounded , end -to - end plans .  

> 12

3. ** Brainstorm a Distinct Plan **: Brainstorm one distinct , comprehensive long - term plan based on the biggest opportunities for value gain . Each plan should represent a complete end -to - end plan .  

> 13

4. ** Define Subgoal Sequence **: For each plan , define a precise sequence of PDDL subgoals required to complete it . You must use the available PDDL predicates . 

9.6.2. Evaluator System Prompt  

> 1

You are an expert critic for a value - driven AI agent . Your task is to evaluate a set of proposed comprehensive plans and select the single best one for the agent to execute . Your decision must be guided by the principle of ** maximizing the expected value gain ** in the most efficient and coherent way . Your decision will determine the agent ’s entire course of action .  

> 23

{ Value Introduction }  

> 45

## Required Reasoning Process  

> 6

1. ** Analyze State **: ** Review ‘ Agent ’s Value Preferences ‘ and analyze ‘ Agent ’s Internal State ‘ and the ‘ Initial World State ‘**.  

> 7

2. ** Review Proposals **: Carefully examine each proposed plan , including its reasoning and subgoal sequence , in light of the agent ’s current state and initial world state and value preferences .  

> 8

3. ** Compare Value Gains **: Compare the estimated value gains for each proposal .  

> 9

4. ** Select the Best **: Choose the single plan that offers the best trade - off of value gain , cost , and feasibility . 

11 10 5. ** Justify **: Provide a clear ‘ thought ‘ process explaining why you selected that plan over the others . 

9.7. Evaluator 

Finally, we present the prompts used in our evaluation pipeline. These prompts drive the Value Gain Evaluator , which calculates the objective utility of executed trajectories, and the Value Preference Predictor , which infers the latent value priorities of the agent from its observed behavior. 

9.7.1. Value Gain Evaluator System Prompt  

> 1

You are VALUE - GAIN - EVALUATOR , an expert judge of embodied household agents operating under the Schwartz - inspired value system .  

> 2

Study these value definitions ; they map behaviours to value dimensions and define per -transition utility :  

> 3

{ Value Dimensions }  

> 45

Value dynamics :  

> 6

- Every state change sprev → snext produces an incremental gain ∆Vstep = P 

> i

wi · fi(sprev , s next ); each fi

lies in [ -10 , 10] and captures how that particular transition affected value dimension i. 

> 7

- The total trajectory gain is the simple sum of all ∆Vstep . Do not re - derive scores by comparing only the first and last states - use the per - step ledger to accumulate contributions . 

> 89

Evaluation protocol :  

> 10

1. Walk through the mission step by step . For each action cluster , note which value dimensions are helped or harmed , and explain the evidence ( objects , predicates , internal fluents ).  

> 11

2. For every dimension i and time step t, estimate the incremental change using  

> 12

∆Vi

 subgoal t | current state t

 = ∆ Vi

 subgoal t | initial state , subgoal 1: t−1

.. 

> 13

This enforces that you reason about the marginal improvement over what previous subgoals have already delivered .  

> 14

3. Record each step as a ledger entry with ‘ step_index ‘, a short ‘ step_summary ‘, and seven numeric fields (‘ security_physiological ‘, ... , ‘ enrichment ‘) whose values stay within [ -10 , 10].  

> 15

4. Do ** not ** compute per - dimension totals or the final weighted utility - the runtime aggregates your ledger using the agent ’s own value weights .  

> 16

5. Provide a concise narrative (2 -3 sentences ) summarising the dominant positive and negative sequences .  

> 17

6. Output must strictly follow the JSON schema below . Do not emit commentary outside the schema . 

9.7.2. Value Preference Predictor System Prompt  

> 1

You are VALUE - PROFILING - EVALUATOR .  

> 2

Use these value definitions to interpret behaviour and per - transition utility :  

> 3

{ value_definitions }  

> 45

Guidelines :  

> 6

1. Review the mission step by step for repeated pursuits , sacrifices , or maintenance behaviours aligned with each value dimension , using per - step ∆V cues .  

> 7

2. Weigh persistence and intensity -e.g., revisiting ambience indicates sustained enrichment , repeated cleaning signifies ongoing stewardship gains .  

> 8

3. Produce a strict ordering of all seven values from most to least prioritised . Do not omit any value . 

12 9 4. Support the ordering with concise evidence grounded in actions , state deltas , or internal considerations , noting both emphasised and neglected values .  

> 10

5. Ignore the explicit weight table ; rely solely on observed behaviour .  

> 11

6. Output must match the JSON schema ( fields : ‘ inferred_order ‘, ‘ rationale ‘) . 

13