Title: VACP: Visual Analytics Context Protocol

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29322v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 00:36:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# VACP : Visual Analytics Context Protocol 

## Tobias Stähle , Péter Ferenc Gyarmati , Thilo Spinner ,Rita Sevastjanova , Dominik Moritz , Mennatallah El-Assady 

Fig. 1: AI agents interacting with Visual Analytics (VA) interfaces using VACP (Visual Analytics Context Protocol). VACP maintains the 

application state and available interactions informed through the different types of knowledge representation of the VA entities . To perform analytical tasks in the interface, an AI agent can use the provided capabilities to perceive the VA interface and understand possible interactions by using VACP. Further, it can interact with the VA interface through the provided interactions. Interactions (e.g., I1

or I2) manipulate the interface appearance, triggering a state transition (e.g., S2 → S3) in the application within the VACP layer. 

Abstract —The rise of AI agents introduces a fundamental shift in Visual Analytics (VA), in which agents act as a new user group. Current agentic approaches—based on computer vision and raw DOM access—fail to perform VA tasks accurately and efficiently. This paper introduces the Visual Analytics Context Protocol (VACP), a framework designed to make VA applications “ agent-ready ”that extends generic protocols by explicitly exposing application state, available interactions, and mechanisms for direct execution. To support our context protocol, we contribute a formal specification of AI agent requirements and knowledge representations in VA interfaces. We instantiate VACP as a library compatible with major visualization grammars and web frameworks, enabling augmentation of existing systems and the development of new ones. Our evaluation across representative VA tasks demonstrates that VACP-enabled agents achieve higher success rates in interface interpretation and execution compared to current agentic approaches, while reducing token consumption and latency. VACP closes the gap between human-centric VA interfaces and machine perceivability, ensuring agents can reliably act as collaborative users in VA systems. 

Index Terms —Visual Analytics, Intelligent Agents, AI Agents, Context Protocol, Agent-Ready Interfaces. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Visual Analytics (VA) systems are traditionally designed with the im-plicit assumption that human users perceive visually encoded data, and cognitively process it to observe patterns. To enhance analytical workflows, mixed-initiative VA systems use machine learning models and agents to automate subtasks or provide guidance [ 10 , 49 ]. These agents mainly serve as an additional component of VA systems. Unlike traditional integrated models, recent advances in agentic AI unlock a new paradigm: AI users , autonomous agents that operate web-sites directly through their web interfaces. Thus, AI agents are increas-ingly tasked with operating interactive UIs [ 53 ], e.g., autonomously performing selection, filtering, and drill-down operations [ 6] to answer analytical questions [ 25 ]. In such contexts, the success of AI agents is contingent on their ability to operate and interact directly with the visual interface. If realized, VA interfaces that support human and AI agents side by side could unlock powerful new potential, enabling real-time collaboration in shared, dynamic analytical environments. Despite this potential, current agentic approaches, such as AI agents powered by recent multimodal foundation models like Gemini [ 51 ], 

• Tobias Stähle, Péter Ferenc Gyarmati, Thilo Spinner, Rita Sevastjanova and Mennatallah El-Assady are with ETH Zürich. E-mail: {tobias.staehle | peterferenc.gyarmati | thilo.spinner |

rita.sevastjanova | menna.elassady}@inf.ethz.ch • Dominik Moritz is with Carnegie Mellon University. E-mail: domoritz@cmu.edu 

GPT-5.2 [ 34 ], and Claude Sonnet 4.5 [ 3], attempt to navigate interfaces visually using Computer Vision or raw HTML parsing [ 2, 8, 33 , 53 ]. By treating agents as human simulators, these approaches struggle to interact with VA applications . They suffer from poor information reten-tion [25], and frequently fail to execute interactions correctly. In early evaluations testing agents on real-world analytical tasks (Sec. 6.4.2), we observed low task completion rates driven by varied failure modes, imprecise data selection, and significant interaction execution errors. We identify this difficulty as a critical “ interface mismatch ” that cur-rently impedes progress. Existing VA systems are optimized for human perception (rendered pixels) and human action (mouse events), creating an environment that is hostile to AI agents. We argue that relying on pixel-level interpretation for logical tasks is fundamentally flawed. It introduces unnecessary latency, stochasticity, and hallucination, forcing a high-intelligence model to operate through a low-fidelity “ keyhole .” Breaking free from this pixel-bound bottleneck unlocks new pos-sibilities for operating mixed-initiative systems. By bypassing visual approximations and exposing underlying logic and data states, we estab-lish a structured, readable connection between the VA system and the AI agent. This structured access allows seamless retrofitting of legacy applications to support agentic accessibility tools. Further, human and AI agents can collaborate within a shared analytical context. Once an interface is fully machine-readable, it establishes a foundation for creating rich programmatic evaluation environments. Researchers can then systematically simulate, test, and benchmark interactive workflows 1

> arXiv:2603.29322v1 [cs.HC] 31 Mar 2026

without relying on expensive human studies. Drawing on existing VA literature and recent work on intelligent agents in VA [ 50 ], we identify that agents require access to informa-tion about the application’s current state, available interaction options, and the ability to execute interactions. Further, we investigate which interface layers encode this knowledge to model application state and interaction representation in a way that balances semantic richness with token efficiency for the AI agent while considering limitations of current AI agents such as context window size [22, 58]. Recent general-purpose standards, such as the Model Context Proto-col (MCP) [ 4], expose tools to AI agents but lack the domain-specific semantic grounding needed for complex, stateful VA. This paper intro-duces the Visual Analytics Context Protocol (VACP), which makes current and future VA systems “ AI-agent-ready .” VACP uses MCP as the communication substrate, and operates above its transport layers, augmenting agent context by exposing the hierarchical data structures and precise interaction spaces unique to VA systems. By exposing a structured application state and clear execution endpoints, VACP transforms VA interfaces into an environment where AI agents can perform analytical tasks reliably and accurately. This allows developers to retrofit existing systems and build new agent-ready VA systems. To our knowledge, VACP is the first context protocol to establish a direct interaction bridge between the VA interface and AI agents as a new synthetic user type. Specifically, we contribute: (1) Specification of Challenges for AI Agents’ Accessibility in VA: 

We specify the knowledge representation non-human actors re-quire to navigate VA systems, combining established interaction taxonomies [ 7, 14 , 21 , 57 ] with the different levels of knowledge representation in VA applications [48]. (2) The Visual Analytics Context Protocol: We define principles for context protocols in interactive, data-rich environments such as VA. Based on these, we formally describe VACP, which ex-poses a context-rich application state, available interactions, and mechanisms for direct execution. (3) The VACP Library: We provide an instantiation of VACP as a TypeScript library that lets developers build agent-ready VA appli-cations at design time with support for modern web frameworks. The architecture supports vanilla JavaScript and frameworks such as D3.js, with built-in default compatibility for higher-level declar-ative formats (Vega [ 41 ], Vega-Lite [ 40 ], and Mosaic’s vgplot [ 19 ]). Its flexible design lets developers extend VACP-provided informa-tion to enrich the agent’s context. (4) A Comparative Evaluation of VACP-enabled Agents: We com-pare VACP-enabled agents with state-of-the-art methods and find that VACP agents achieve higher task completion rates while sig-nificantly reducing token consumption and execution time. Ad-ditionally, when existing vision-based approaches are augmented with VACP, agents can reliably perform analytical tasks and inde-pendently verify visual outputs using their vision capabilities. By replacing ad hoc, heuristic observation with robust, formal com-munication, VACP lays the foundation for turning AI agents from passive observers into reliable analytical collaborators. Released as open-source software on github.com/ETH-IVIA-Lab/VACP, VACP em-powers VA developers to build new or supercharge existing VA systems with interfaces designed from the ground up for AI agent accessibility .

2 BACKGROUND & R ELATED WORK 

Web Agents and Browser Automation — The shift of Large Lan-guage Models (LLMs) from passive text processors to active agents has catalyzed research on autonomous web navigation [ 53 ]. Early browser automation relied on rigid, rule-based scripts (e.g., Selenium [ 44 ] or re-inforcement learning in simplified environments like World of Bits [ 46 ]. Recent agentic approaches leverage LLMs’ semantic reasoning to inter-pret the Document Object Model (DOM) [ 55 ] or screenshots to execute tasks dynamically [ 18 ]. Chrome recently proposed WebMCP [ 52 ], a JavaScript interface integrated into webpages that exposes general application functionality as tools for AI browser agents to invoke. However, these approaches suffer from a critical Interface Mismatch in VA. DOM-based agents struggle because modern VA applications rely on <canvas> or complex SVG structures that exceed LLM context windows [ 18 ]. To a standard DOM parser, a D3.js scatterplot becomes a semantic black box , i.e., a collection of thousands of anonymous path elements or a single opaque pixel buffer, lacking the semantic descriptors needed for reasoning. Overcoming the context-window bottleneck would require aggressive DOM pruning, which would re-move critical interface logic needed to understand the interface prop-erly. Vision-based agents (e.g., pixels-to-actions [ 45 ] and computer-use agents [ 2, 33 ]) better mimic human perception but lack the coordinate precision necessary for dense data environments. As Kartha et al. [ 25 ]note, this causes high hallucination rates, where agents misinterpret visual overlaps or fail to distinguish subtle color encodings. While benchmarks like WebArena [ 60 ] and Mind2Web [ 12 ] exist to assess the performance of AI agents in general web tasks, to the best of our knowledge, there are no benchmarks for the interactive VA domain. 

Visualization Accessibility for Agent Perception — We posit that the challenge of exposing VA systems to AI agents parallels that of making visualizations accessible to vision-impaired users. In both cases, con-sumers cannot rely on visual gestalt and need a structured, traversable alternative [ 15 , 24 ]. In addition, AI agents require explicit semantic representations to ground their reasoning. Work on visualization accessibility has matured from simple alt text generation to the provision of rich semantic structures. Zong et al. [ 61 ]and Lundgard and Satyanarayan [ 29 ] argue that true accessibility re-quires exposing not just statistical facts but also the hierarchical and semantic relationships among data, encodings, and annotations. In the context of VA, Sacha et al. [ 39 ] point out that users face uncer-tainty due to resolution and clutter in visual outputs. For agents, this uncertainty is exacerbated by the stochastic nature of vision-language models. To overcome this, declarative grammars like Vega-Lite [ 40 ]and Mosaic’s vgplot [ 19 , 20 ] can provide a theoretical baseline, as they explicitly define the mapping from data to visual channels. Das et al. [ 11 ] underline this by demonstrating that multimodal LLMs, when provided with such structured data, can interpret visualizations better. However, a key distinction remains: existing accessibility layers are primarily designed for consumption —reading the visualizations. They rarely expose the affordances of the interface for operation (e.g., that brushing interval A filters view B). Kim et al. [ 26 ] emphasize the need for non-visual interaction modalities as interactive visualizations be-come more complex and popular. Nevertheless, the absence of this meta-information leads to what Gillmann et al. [ 16 ] describe as usage uncertainty. By extending the read-only semantic schemas of VA into a read-write protocol, VACP enables AI agents to actively manipulate system state. This effectively treats the AI agent as a user with specific “accessibility ” needs for state manipulation. 

Interactions in Visualizations — To provide effective VA applications, the importance of interaction is widely recognized [ 35 , 57 ]. Existing interaction taxonomies categorize interactions based on user intent [ 57 ]and interactive dynamics [ 21 ]. These taxonomies provide the necessary vocabulary to describe what an agent intends to do. In addition, while guidelines for interaction design exist [ 5, 43 ], implementation is often tightly coupled to the rendering engine [59]. Dimara and Perin [ 14 ] argue for distinguishing the intent of an in-teraction from its physical mechanism to decouple the interaction’s utility from its specific implementation, thereby enabling the evalu-ation of interaction techniques independent of input modalities. For the specific requirements of mixed-initiative VA [ 10 ], where agents must proactively support users, the agent requires a formal definition of the interaction space. Declarative grammars like Vega-Lite effectively model the intent of interactions internally (via Signals and Selections). However, many grammars lack an Interaction Gateway , i.e., a seman-tic Application Programming Interface (API) that lets external agents discover and trigger intents directly without passing through the UI layer. For current AI agents, the physical mechanism (e.g., simulating mouse drags) is a hindrance [ 60 ]. Recent work on agentic tool use suggests that agents are more effective at the intent level (API/tool calls) [ 42 ]. Recent advancements, such as the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [ 4 ] lower the bound by exposing predefined tools in a structured format, and tools such as Embedding Atlas [ 38 ] already use MCP. How-2ever, these approaches could benefit from a more efficient protocol. We conceptualize agent-VA interactions in the UI as two stages. Stage 1 covers operating on predefined interfaces (e.g., selecting, filtering, high-lighting) to generate insights within fixed constraints. Stage 2 involves authoring or reconfiguring interactive dashboards. While dashboard generation and composition are popular research topics [ 13 ], we argue that an agent’s ability to (re)configure a dashboard has limited value without subsequent interaction to refine findings. Thus, this paper fo-cuses on enabling Stage 1 interactions as the operational foundation for future complex authoring tasks. A working Stage 2 use case is provided in the supplemental material. 

3 KNOWLEDGE AND APPLICATION STATE ACCESS IN VA 

To build a robust gateway that enables AI agents to perceive and op-erate within interactive VA applications, we first need to identify the functional components of these interfaces. Drawing on HCI and In-formation Visualization research [ 5, 7, 14 , 21 , 59 ], we decompose VA interfaces into two operational dimensions: Knowledge Representation 

and Interactive Functionality . This decomposition defines the state space that an AI agent must perceive to reason effectively about the an-alytic process, rather than merely describing the user interface. Further, we analyze this space to identify challenges ( chXX ) for providing AI agents accessibility in VA interfaces. 

Knowledge Representation and Visual Composition. — The primary function of VA interfaces is to represent knowledge: serving as a visual proxy for the underlying data model. At its core, a VA interface consists of at least one visualization view with graphical elements that encode data attributes as visual tokens (e.g., marks, channels). Modern VA tools rarely rely on a single view. As surveyed by Bach et al. [ 5], these interfaces are often complex compositions. For an AI agent, understanding the interface requires more than detecting individual visualizations. It requires parsing the structural logic or “grammar” of how views are spatially arranged and logically linked to represent high-dimensional knowledge ( ch01 : Understanding Interface Logic ). 

Interactivity, Operational Dynamics, and Feedback. — Beyond static representation, the interface is defined by its Interactivity and Interaction Feedback. Interactions in VA interfaces are well stud-ied [ 21 , 28 , 31 ]. The literature provides abstract, high-level descriptions of interactions, focusing on user intent rather than technical implemen-tation in web interfaces. Following Munzner’s What-Why-How frame-work [ 31 ], these interactive elements (lasso, zoom handles, or sliders, dropdowns) operationalize the user’s or agent’s intent (the “Why”). As Heer and Shneiderman [ 21 ] note, these elements drive transitions between data states (e.g., filtering) and visual states (e.g., encoding changes). AI agents must identify and interact with these actuators to conduct or steer analysis ( ch02 : Affordance Identification ). High-level analytic interactions consist of sequential low-level input events (e.g., mouse movements, hovers, clicks). Executing operations, such as brushing a specific data cluster, requires highly accurate spatial coordination. Thus, AI agents must not only decide what action to take, but also synthesize and execute these fine-grained, coordinate-based steps to reliably update the data state ( ch03 : Accurate Interaction ). Effective interaction requires perceptible responsiveness [ 35 ]. To close the interaction loop, VA systems provide visual feedback (e.g., highlight selections, update tooltips) to confirm how actions change the system state [ 28 ]. For an AI agent, this is critical: to interact reliably, it must verify that its actions (e.g., selections) have been successfully reg-istered and processed by the application ( ch04 : Interaction Feedback ). 

Knowledge Layers — The complexity of data-rich and interactive VA environments poses distinct challenges for autonomous AI agents be-yond general web navigation. VA application states are transient and multifaceted, and many interfaces depend on users’ intuition and prior knowledge to discover possible interactions. While some interfaces pro-vide tutorials [ 5], many assume implicit expectations and user expertise. Because LLM-based agents only know what appears in their training corpus, we cannot assume they possess the necessary knowledge or implicit expectations about VA interactions ( ch05 : Providing Context ). The “correct” interpretation of represented knowledge and interaction 

> Fig. 2: Overview of knowledge representation layers in VA applications, agents’ accessibility, and VACP functions for perceiving the VA interface at each level and supporting interactions. Each layer abstracts the knowl-edge, including the data to be analyzed, data encoding, and interface functionalities defined by production logic and design decisions.

possibilities strongly depends on the interplay among underlying data distribution, user’s analytical task, and provided information. Prior work [ 30 , 54 ] shows that performance scales with the struc-tural clarity of the environment. However, there is no standardized context protocol for an agent to query the “holistic state” of a VA system across knowledge-representation layers to interact with the interface. We argue that moving from simple UI automation to col-laborative analytics requires a unified representation that synthesizes perceptual, structural, and semantic knowledge ( ch01 ). Thus, we iden-tify four interlinked VA knowledge-representation layers (see Fig. 2):  

> L1

pixel-based, L2 DOM-based, L3 declarative grammar-based, and  

> L4

production logic-based. 

3.1 L1 Pixel-based Representation 

Definition and Scope. In VA, the most practical representation of knowledge is the rendered (usually 2D) application interface that can be visually perceived. In web-based VA applications, this is the ren-dered DOM, i.e., the final product. Within the VA application design process, it is the highest level of knowledge abstraction, as all infor-mation is summarized in a visual output. When the underlying data or visualization logic changes, this representation must be re-rendered to reflect the updated knowledge. 

Format and Structure. The pixel-based representation is unstructured. Unlike the underlying layers ( L2 – L4 , see Fig. 2), it can only convey as much information as there are pixels on the screen. 

Encoded Knowledge and Added Value. Despite being unstructured, this representation can be used to extract the application layout and the position of visual elements. Within a data visualization [ 5], this layer reveals visually detectable data patterns, such as clusters, outliers, trends, high-density regions, and differences among data points marked by distinct visual encodings (e.g., color, shape). 

Interaction Capabilities. Many VA systems implement interactions to enable further exploration. However, in the pixel-based representation, possible interactions are usually not explicitly described. Unless the visual interface explicitly lists and describes them (e.g., via text or explicit affordances), users and agents must infer available interactions from experience and implicit expectations ( ch02 ). 

Accessibility for AI Agents. An AI agent can access this layer by taking a screenshot of the current application interface. To interpret it, the agent needs computer vision capabilities ( ch06 : Modality Access ). 

3.2 L2 DOM-based Representation 

Definition and Scope. In web applications, the Document Object Model (DOM) is a browser-managed logical tree representing the application’s structure, element roles, and content. It abstracts VA knowledge from visual grammar and the developer’s production logic, capturing the interface’s live state, including all elements relevant to rendering and functionality. 

Format and Structure. The DOM is often described using a text-based, XML-structured format—HTML—that defines the application’s component hierarchy. Tag contents can be text and code. The DOM derived from HTML is dynamic and can be modified with JavaScript. 

Encoded Knowledge and Added Value. The DOM layer adds signif-icant value beyond a pixel-based representation. It maintains the L1 

knowledge representation but augments it with retrievable data values, 3exact numbers, and precise positions of visual marks. It supports nested hierarchies and configuration components, such as form elements map-ping data attributes to axes. Through metadata and accessibility tags (e.g., aria-attributes [ 23 ]), it also reveals how visual variables are en-coded and provides additional descriptions of data attributes that a pure image cannot convey. 

Interaction Capabilities. The DOM includes event listeners (e.g., for mouse events) that define the system’s interactivity. From these listen-ers, agents can infer baseline interactions such as click and hover 

(ch02 ). Higher-level interactions, such as brushing—a sequence of mouse-down, mouse-move, and mouse-up—may also be inferred when tags have specific attributes or names, though this is not guaranteed. 

Accessibility for AI Agents. For AI agents to perceive this layer, they must access the DOM at application runtime ( ch07 : Sync States ). Because the primary format is structured text, they also need to process textual information to extract the encoded knowledge. 

3.3 L3 Declarative Grammar Representation 

Definition and Scope. A declarative grammar describes knowledge on the format of the interface by a set of rules or guidelines for creating consistent, effective visualizations. Such grammars define a common vocabulary and structure for building and interpreting visualizations. In the VA application design process, this is knowledge at a low-level abstraction: everything is strictly specified by the template schema before compilation into layer L2 .

Format and Structure. Common grammars such as Vega, Vega-Lite, and Mosaic’s vgplot use JSON or YAML . These definitions serve as blueprints for the interactive visualizations in the rendered application. 

Encoded Knowledge and Added Value. Based on these definitions, this layer encodes knowledge of attribute visualization, hierarchies, layouts, and rules for color selection and chart types. It explicitly maps data attributes to visual objects. Unlike the DOM, which represents the computed visual components, the declarative grammar captures the precise intent and configuration of the visualization design. 

Interaction Capabilities. Interactions are explicitly defined and linked to specific data attributes and visual objects in the grammar. Higher-level interactions like brushing are directly declared, listing available interactions. Additional semantic knowledge can be inferred from the interaction definitions and the data variables they manipulate. ( ch05 )

Accessibility for AI Agents. The declarative grammar-based definitions must be injected into the runtime to be accessible to an AI agent ( ch07 )via specific tools or DOM access. As with the knowledge representation in layer L2 , an AI agent needs text-parsing capabilities to interpret (semi-)structured text schemas. 

3.4 L4 Semantic Knowledge Representation 

Definition and Scope. The production logic encodes semantic knowl-edge generated during the VA design and development. While layers  

> L1

– L3 describe composition and outcome, this layer captures the “why”: design decisions, rationales, and intended purposes of specific interactions or visual marks, offering a holistic application view. 

Format and Structure. As these details can represent any type of information, there is no fixed format or template. When available, they are usually documented as free-text annotations by the developer, such as code comments. 

Encoded Knowledge and Added Value. This semantic knowledge reveals insights into the underlying data, machine learning model, and intended tasks or user groups. It explains why a data attribute is encoded in a specific way and whether a VA application suits particular tasks. 

Interaction Capabilities. This layer’s interaction knowledge is seman-tic rather than functional. It describes metadata, such as an interaction’s purpose, instead of just technical event listeners or grammar definitions. 

Accessibility for AI Agents. Current VA applications do not naturally expose this knowledge layer to users or agents, requiring extra logic or methods to access it at runtime. Because the knowledge is mostly encoded in free text, AI agents require robust text parsing and natural language understanding to interpret the semantic information ( ch06 ). 

4 VACP: THE VISUAL ANALYTICS CONTEXT PROTOCOL 

To bridge the gap between human-oriented VA interfaces and AI agents, there is need for a protocol that meets both their requirements and mediates between them. The VA application requires strict system logic and state consistency, while AI agents need semantic richness and a way to perceive and act on the VA interface. We therefore propose the Visual Analytics Context Protocol ( VACP ).VACP serves as a formal abstraction layer that decouples the agent from implementation details (e.g., DOM structures or pixel data) while preserving a holistic semantic understanding of the analytical environ-ment. It comprises three components: (1) Application State Represen-tation , modeling the interface and its elements as a temporal semantic graph; (2) Exposition of Available Interactions , formalizing valid state transitions; and (3) Interaction Execution Gateway , translating the agent’s intent into executed interactions. We ground our context protocol in principles that we consider the minimal requirements for enabling agents to navigate data-rich environments, even beyond VA ap-plications. Some principles inform the agent through Contextualization ,while others ensure operations and Interactive Dynamics in the VA inter-face. In the following, we first introduce the principle, then explain its application in VACP and annotate the challenges (identified in Sec. 3) that we address with the principle. 

4.1 Application State Representation 

P1 – App State Exposure Application State Contextualization 

To reason about an interface, the agent needs an up-to-date, semanti-cally grounded representation of the application state. 

Unlike experienced human VA users, who intuitively grasp visual metaphors, AI agents require explicit encoding of component purposes and the developer’s design decisions. VA applications are typically structured hierarchically, which we encode as a hierarchical state graph. 

Nodes represent distinct VA components, from global settings and dataset selection to fine-grained elements like interaction feedback. 

Edges capture structural containment (e.g., a “Dashboard” node con-taining a “Scatterplot” node) and semantic relations, such as coordi-nated views (e.g., “Selection in Plot A filters Data in Plot B”). In VACP, agents access the (semantic) application state via get_state() , and lay-ers L1 and L2 via get_chart() and get_dom_extract() . ( ch01 , ch07 )

P2 – Metadata Annotation Metadata Contextualization 

By adding descriptive metadata about component purpose or behav-ior, we lower the reasoning barrier for agents. To support reliable reference and reasoning, the state representation adheres to the following constraints: Unique Identification: Each node has a stable, unique ID so the agent can consistently reference components across a session. Temporal Consistency: The application is treated as a living document. Each state snapshot includes a times-tamp and unique snapshot ID to avoid race conditions and ensure the agent uses the latest interface state. Semantic Annotation: Nodes are annotated with metadata about component type, semantic layer, and a natural language description of their purpose. While optional metadata enriches context and eases the agent’s reasoning. ( ch05 )

P3 – Agent Constraint Awareness Interactive Dynamics 

Considering agent constraints, such as context window size, opti-mizes agent runtime and reduces the risk of performance degradation. Crucially, VACP addresses the finite context window of LLM-based AI agents with a details-on-demand architecture. Instead of serializing all underlying data into state and quickly hitting token limits, the state only exposes the data’s structure and availability . The agent can then use inspect_data() to retrieve only the specific data points relevant to its current task. ( ch05 , ch06 )4Fig. 3: Example VACP application-state representation. The capability graph captures semantic structure and interaction-relevant relations; the state snapshot stores currently active values under the same stable references. 

P4 – Provenance Tracking Temporal Contextualization 

When interacting with the VA interfaces, agents might reach a state that is a dead end. Reverting to previous states might require multiple interactions. Providing direct jumps back to a previous state improves the performance of the agent. Provenance tracking is optional. 

4.2 Exposition of Available Interactions 

Interactive VA systems are defined by the dynamic relationship between the user and the system. In VACP, an interaction is an intent-driven agent action that triggers a system reaction, resulting in an application state mutation. We formalize the state updates as follows. Let V =

{v1, . . . , vn} be the set of visual components and I = {i1, . . . , im} the set of available interactions. The application state at time T , ST , is defined by the configuration of these components and available interactions: 

ST = {VT , IT }. Applying an interaction ixT ∈ IT with parameters P =

{p1, . . . , pk} produces the next state: ST +1 = ixT (ST , P).

P5 – Interaction Exposure Interaction Contextualization 

All currently valid interactions need to be explicitly exposed to the agent. This exposure is dynamic. VACP requires registering available interactions provided to the agent by observing available interaction capabilities. For safe execution, the protocol specifies interaction parameters, indicating which are required or optional, their data types, and valid ranges. Additional descriptions provide functional context. Agents can view all available interactions via get_capabilities() . ( ch02 )

P6 – Dynamic Interaction Update Update Dynamics 

On application state update, the protocol must dynamically update the list of capabilities to expose the currently available interactions. To address the dynamics of the systems, VACP allows for dynamic registration or release of interactions to reflect the current context. Interactions are represented as action nodes within the state graph, linked to the components they manipulate. ( ch02 )

P7 – Tailored Data Access Data Contextualization 

Instead of serializing all underlying data into state, which would rapidly exhaust token limits, the state exposes only the structure and 

availability of data. The agent then queries specific data points only when they are relevant to the current task. Additionally, VACP mitigates data-access bottlenecks with two actions: 

get_schema() : Lets the agent inspect the data’s logical structure and constraints without loading records. inspect_data() : Lets the agent run structured queries to retrieve subsets or aggregates of data tied to a visual component, delegating arithmetic to the system engine and avoiding LLM arithmetic calculation errors. ( ch06 )

4.3 Gateway for Direct Interaction Execution 

P8 – Interaction Execution Gateway Execution Dynamics 

To close the perception–action loop, the agent requires an API to execute interactions, giving it full accessibility beyond view-only mode and allowing it to manipulate the application state. 

The final VACP component is the execution gateway, which closes the loop between perception and action and serves as the operational API for the agent’s action calls. When execute_interaction() is invoked, the gateway runs a multi-step validation. It resolves the interaction reference ID to the corresponding VA system function, checks that the interaction is still valid in the current state snapshot (handling latency-related conflicts), and confirms that the provided parameters satisfy the type and range constraints defined in the exposition phase. The gateway manages the synchronous execution of the interaction, im-mediately applying state updates to minimize latency. It then returns structured feedback to the agent: On success: a confirmation status or, for data queries, the requested results. On failure: a descriptive error message that supports agentic reasoning, helping the LLM di-agnose issues (e.g., invalid parameters) and attempt self-correction. The gateway can also support advanced features for mixed-initiative systems, including interaction provenance logging, undo/redo stacks for safe exploration, and “human-in-the-loop” hooks that require user confirmation for high-stakes actions. ( ch02 , ch03 , ch04 )

4.4 Agent Workflow using VACP 

Fig. 1 shows how AI agents use VACP to interact with a VA interface. The agent first inspects the application state by interpreting the interface structure, VACP metadata, and interactive elements. It then chooses an action to advance its analysis, such as changing a visual data mapping, which updates the interface. The agent reads the updated state via VACP to verify the change. If it needs to focus on a data subset, it can brush the line chart. The system converts this into a selection, updates the application state, reflects the selection in the interface, and VACP passes this updated state back to the agent for its next step. 

5 THE VACP L IBRARY 

We implement VACP as a TypeScript library 1 for web-based VA sys-tems. The library decouples the semantic interaction contract from the DOM layout, rendering backend, and UI framework. To integrate with existing ecosystems, we provide adapters for declarative grammars such as Vega-Lite [ 40 ] and Mosaic’s vgplot [ 19 ], plus a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server for transport [4]. 

Design Goals. — The implementation targets four goals: Minimal setup via default capabilities and state mappings; Direct integration 

with common VA stacks to retrofit existing interfaces without chang-ing interaction logic; Extensibility through domain-specific metadata and custom actions; and State consistency by synchronizing a single application state across human and agent interactions. 

5.1 Semantic Grammar: State and Interactions 

The architecture isolates protocol semantics from transport layers. At runtime, the application defines three synchronized objects: a capability graph, a state snapshot, and an action catalog. Transport layers pass requests to this runtime without changing their semantic meaning. 

State Representation. — The library divides application state into structural capabilities and live values, as shown in Fig. 3. Structural   

> 1Available as open-source at §github.com/ETH-IVIA-Lab/VACP.

5Fig. 4: Overview of the Evaluation pipeline. where the left (a) shows the overall task execution and evaluation workflow, and the right (b) illustrates the agent setup and the different evaluated scenarios S1 – S4 .

capabilities are mostly static and define the semantic space via the capa-bility graph. Live values change during interaction and encode current selections or control settings in the state snapshot. Both layers use sta-ble semantic references, letting agents track entities across multi-step interactions without re-identifying DOM elements after each update. Developers can optionally attach metadata such as titles and summaries to these references to clarify domain semantics when multiple valid operations exist. 

Action and Data Representation. — VACP models interactions as semantic actions instead of low-level UI events. Each catalog action has a stable identifier, parameter schema, and optional target reference. For data access, VACP offers structured queries on referenced data handles, letting agents retrieve relevant datapoints and aggregates with-out reading from pixels or the DOM. This bounds data extraction and avoids serializing full datasets into the LLM context. 

5.2 Execution and Transport Loop 

Interaction execution uses a validated request–response cycle. When an agent submits an action, the runtime validates parameters, runs the framework logic, and returns structured feedback. This explicit channel surfaces execution errors for self-correction. Afterward, the agent queries the updated state via stable references to verify the outcome. To reduce LLM context limits and latency, the implementation avoids continuous full-state serialization, scoping state updates to semantic references and returning them as incremental diffs. 

MCP Agent Accessibility. — To connect VACP to external agents, we provide an MCP server that acts exclusively as a transport layer. We deliberately avoid dynamically mapping VA interactions to MCP tools, since updating the MCP tool registry after each UI change would be too costly in tokens and latency. Instead, the MCP server exposes a small, static set of core tools for state observation and action execution. The agent uses these tools to query the internal VACP action catalog and decides when to refresh its view of available interactions. If it attempts an obsolete action, the VACP runtime returns a structured error, prompting the agent to adjust. 

5.3 Integration Examples 

The library uses adapter patterns to map framework-specific interactions to the shared VACP contract, supporting two common VA paradigms: declarative grammars and custom imperative visualizations. 

Declarative libraries : an adapter parses the specification to extract encodings, parameters, and selections. A wrapper function maps na-tive Vega-Lite specifications to protocol actions while preserving their execution logic. 

Custom charts : without a standardized internal model, develop-ers manually build the semantic bridge by defining stable references to interactive components, exposing framework-specific functions as semantic actions, and adding a polling function to sync live state. 

6 EVALUATION 

We evaluate VACP-enabled agents against state-of-the-art approaches to validate the VACP framework’s effectiveness and improvements. We detail our methodology, evaluation setup, and findings. 

6.1 Methodology 

To systematically evaluate and improve AI web agents in VA, we established a multi-stage process encompassing benchmark dataset curation, expert task validation, identification of agent limitations, and the development and evaluation of VACP. 

Benchmark Development and Task Formalization. — While visual-ization literacy tests like VLAT [ 27 ] exist, to the best of our knowledge, there is no standardized benchmark dataset for assessing users’ ability to use interactive VA systems to solve problems. To fill this gap, we curated a representative set of baseline VA systems and tasks. Our goal was to test whether AI web agents can perform fundamental VA interaction primitives, prioritizing atomic tasks rather than complex workflows to isolate specific perception and execution failures. We identified a representative set of tasks and systems from estab-lished literature, such as visualization design spaces and literacy tests. Because real-world VA applications use diverse web technologies, our benchmark needs to reflect this diversity. We therefore implemented the test systems using two distinct approaches: custom, low-level code (React and D3.js) and high-level specification languages (Vega, Vega-Lite, and Mosaic vgplot). This variety allows testing whether an agent can adapt to different web structures and levels of semantic complex-ity. The final tasks and systems were refined through iterative expert discussions among the authors. Further details on these use cases are provided in Sec. 6.2. After selecting the use cases, we implemented the tasks across the identified implementation spaces, resulting in five use cases: one React-based (Parallel Coordinates Plot), three Vega-Lite, and one vgplot example. 

Pre-Study and Expert Validation. — To ensure our benchmark was solvable and representative, we conducted a formative pre-study with VA experts, who interacted with the selected VA systems to solve the defined tasks. The study aimed to (1) verify task solvability, (2) assess 

> Fig. 5: Overview of VA interfaces of the defined VA use cases.

6Fig. 6: Workflow of Claude Sonnet 4.5 solving Task UC1A in scenario S4 . After inspecting a screenshot and the VACP semantic state, the agent adjusts the selected year and verifies the change in the UI. It then queries the data, identifies “Japan,” confirms this by hovering over Japan’s data point, and finally returns “Japan” as the answer. 

the suitability of the visualizations and interactions, and (3) evaluate the representativeness of system components. It yielded critical feedback for optimizing our experimental design. Experts confirmed that the tasks, visualizations, and interactions were representative but identified ambiguities in several task descriptions. We refined these descriptions to ensure that subsequent agent failures could be attributed to functional limitations rather than prompt ambiguity. 

Baseline Agent Evaluation. — We evaluated current state-of-the-art web AI agents on our benchmark and found that they fail most tasks (completion rate 28%–51%). Our analysis shows that agents miss the visualization’s semantic context, struggle to access data details hidden within the DOM, and lack the precision for accurate interactions. 

Comparative Evaluation. — Finally, we evaluated the efficacy of our approach by implementing VACP and giving AI agents access to different context scenarios. This summative evaluation tested whether agents using VACP could complete the analytic tasks. We compared VACP against alternative context types (e.g., raw UI and DOM ac-cess), measuring task completion, duration, and token usage to assess efficiency. For deeper analysis, we annotated each agent turn with dimensions based on foundational HCI literature [ 9, 32 , 36 ] to quantify agent behavior, recognizing that solution paths are highly iterative and that successes and failures are not random prompt artifacts, but rather structural consequences of navigating or failing to navigate the VA pipeline based on the provided knowledge and interaction access. 

6.2 Use Case and Task Description 

To rigorously evaluate AI agents in VA, we used the previous curated set of representative use cases spanning a comprehensive design space. The scenarios cover diverse data modalities, visualization techniques, and complex interactions. To probe technical limits, we include both declarative grammars and imperative paradigms (React, D3.js), requir-ing agents to manipulate SVG-based DOM elements and pixel-based canvas renderings (see Fig. 5). 

UC1 – Global Development. This interactive bubble chart visualizes health demographics over time. It supports temporal animation via sliders, tooltips for details, and geometric zooming/panning to resolve occlusion in dense regions. 

UC2 – Seattle Weather. A coordinated multiple-view system links a temperature scatterplot with a weather-frequency bar chart. The tightly coupled views support bidirectional cross-filtering—temporal brushing updates distributions, categorical selection filters records, and hover reveals precise details. 

UC3 – Olympic Athletes. A dashboard combining a biometric scat-terplot (with gender-based regression lines) and a sortable data table, supporting complex queries via spatial brushing and filters for sport, gender, and keywords. 

UC4 – U.S. Flights. A geospatial node-link diagram overlaid on a map supports egocentric network analysis. Clicking an airport node filters outgoing flight edges, while hovering reveals weighted edge attributes (flight counts) and node metadata. 

UC5 – Technical Car Specs. A Parallel Coordinates Plot for high-dimensional automotive data [ 37 ]. It enables multivariate analysis through multi-axis brushing for concurrent constraints, drag-and-drop axis reordering to expose correlations, and global reset controls. 

Task Definitions. — We defined the tasks based on existing VA task frameworks and typologies [ 7, 31 ] to obtain a representative set of analytical tasks. For each use case UCx, we specify three tasks (UCxL, UCxI, UCxC) that differ in the required interaction methods and focus on elementary analytical tasks: locate (UCxL), identify (UCxI), and 

compare (UCxC). Some tasks require completing multiple elementary tasks, but the primary focus is the one indicated by the index. All task descriptions are provided in the supplemental material. 

6.3 Verification of Task & Interface Representativeness 

To align our benchmark with real VA challenges, we conducted an expert user study to verify that our use cases and tasks form a represen-tative baseline for evaluating AI agents. 

Study Design and Demographics. — We recruited N = 7 partici-pants (Pt) to complete 15 tasks across our VA use cases: six domain experts in VA and HCI, and one non-expert. This enabled us to assess expert alignment and interface intuitiveness. Participants completed tasks, rated cognitive demand and tediousness, and judged task repre-sentativeness on a 5-point Likert scale. 

Representativeness of Interactions and Tasks. — Participants rated the interactions as highly representative (Median = 5, μ ≈ 4.6 ). Pt4 described them as “very natural interactions,” mirroring how a human analyst explores data. Pt1, Pt2, Pt5, Pt6, and Pt7 agreed that “all interac-tions made sense.” Participants rated the tasks as highly representative (Median = 4, μ ≈ 4.4 ). Pt4 noted the tasks cover a wide range, includ-ing diverse datasets, variations, temporal data, and geospatial patterns. Pt1 said real VA tasks are “more complex and open-ended” than the atomic tasks, but we emphasize that these are the basic building blocks of analysis. If AI agents struggle with the foundational tasks, they are not ready for the ambiguity of real-world exploration. 

Task Correctness and Ambiguity Resolution. — Human participants achieved an 85.71% completion rate. No task stumped all participants, confirming solvability. The study revealed specific challenges that informed our final task descriptions: Visual Complexity: The U.S. Flights task is difficult because dense datapoints create overlapping lines, obscuring routes. This shows the testbed captures real-world “messiness,” where occlusion challenges agents. Ambiguity: Pt2, Pt4, Pt5, and Pt6 flagged ambiguous terms in Global Development (finding the “largest” country) and U.S. Flights (defining “smallest” airport) use cases. We revised prompts to remove ambiguity for AI agents while keeping visual difficulty. Precision vs. Estimation: Accuracy varied by strategy: participants using hovers and tooltips were more precise than those visually estimating from axes. This distinction is crucial for evaluation, separating agents that can “read” the DOM (tooltips) from those that must “see” the rasterized chart. 

Interface Design and Usability. — Including a non-expert (Pt5) helped test usability. Despite lacking VA expertise, Pt5 identified interactions and completed tasks, indicating intuitive interfaces. Pt3 felt that some visual encodings could be improved, but said that such imperfections are common in real-world interfaces. Pt5 requested “more precise con-trols, like entering explicit numbers or text for filtering,” supporting our 7VACP contribution, which offers agents more precise control options than standard interfaces. 

Summary. — This study shows our testbed is realistic and high-fidelity for VA agent testing, with natural interactions and tasks that accurately reflect real visual and cognitive challenges in VA workflows. 

6.4 Agent Evaluation 

To validate the VACP framework, we evaluated AI agent performance under varying levels of contextual access, examining how different interface representations (from standard visual scene captures to our semantically enriched VACP interface) affect VA task completion. 

6.4.1 Evaluation Setup 

Our experimental design uses a series of AI agents composed of state-of-the-art multimodal foundation models for text parsing, vision, and tool use, all operating within a standardized agentic loop. This loop follows the ReAct [ 56 ] framework, allowing agents to iteratively reason, act, and observe feedback. For evaluation, we used human pre-validated VA tasks and interfaces (see Sec. 6.3). 

Models and Sampling Strategy. — To avoid artifacts tied to a specific model, we evaluate three SOTA models: GPT-5.2 (Ope-nAI) [ 34 ], Claude 4.5 Sonnet (Anthropic) [ 3], and Gemini 3 Pro Pre-view (Google) [ 51 ]. Due to the non-deterministic nature of LLMs (e.g., temperature), we ran all experiments three times per model to capture variance in success rate, token usage, and runtime. This allows us to assess generalizability and identify cross-model behavioral pat-terns across scenarios. While runs differed in their reasoning paths, they produced similar outcomes, with only minor variation in token consumption and duration. 

Scenarios. — We evaluate agents in four scenarios, reflecting increas-ing context, knowledge representation, and interaction access:  

> S1

UI + DOM: Mirroring current general-purpose web agents, agents see only screenshots ( L1 ) and raw DOM ( L2 ). Complex visualizations (Vega-Lite/Mosaic) are rendered as canvas elements, so their data is hidden from DOM parsers. Only the PCP use case uses SVG. Agents act via emulated mouse events and JavaScript execution.  

> S2

UI + DOM + State: Building on L1 and L2 , we inject the instan-taneous VACP application state into the DOM as serialized JSON in a hidden node. Agents can access it via DOM queries but must first discover and parse this node.  

> S3

VACP (State + Interaction Gateway): This ablation removes visual and DOM access. Agents interact exclusively via tools from the VACP MCP server ( L3 , L4 ), relying entirely on the semantic API and testing the VACP schema’s expressiveness without visual grounding.  

> S4

VACP + UI + DOM: Agents receive the full toolset ( L1 – L4 ): VACP tools, DOM access, and screenshots, letting us study synergies or conflicts between visual perception and semantic data retrieval. 

Technical Implementation. — We use OpenCode [ 1] to manage the agentic loop, ensuring a robust, reproducible tool-execution environ-ment. Each experiment runs in an isolated, sandboxed browser instance. Figure 4 shows the evaluation setup. All agent runs share the same system prompt, which specifies the task, expected response format (see supplemental material), and the initial interface URL. The system prompt was not updated during the runs. In scenarios S3 and S4 ,agents access VACP via an MCP server exposing the available tools. All experiments were run on an Apple MacBook Pro with an M3 Max chip and 36GB memory, using model providers’ APIs for inference. The evaluation source code is provided in the supplemental material. 

Initial Test Runs — Prior to the main evaluation, we conducted pilot studies with a standard “computer use” loop [ 17 ]. Performance was suboptimal: agents struggled with controls such as dropdowns and inputs, and the setup did not support non-Gemini models. This resulted in the shift to the more robust, well-tested, open-source OpenCode framework. We also found that agents exploited “loopholes” instead of solving VA tasks, e.g., hallucinating answers from pre-training on stan-dard datasets, downloading data from external GitHub repositories, or writing Python scripts to parse the DOM and bypass visual interaction.     

> Fig. 7: Summary of the AI agent evaluation on the provided use cases and tasks. Each tile presents the number of successful runs over three runs. Percentages after the agent model name indicate overall success rate on the provided scenarios S1 –S4 , use cases, and tasks.

In response, we refined the system prompt to enforce strict tool use and restricted sandbox network access to prevent data leakage. 

6.4.2 Evaluation Results 

A summary of the experiments is shown in Fig. 7. Detailed traces of the agents’ perception, chain-of-thought, and actions are provided in supplemental material. 

Success Rates and the Visual Gap. — We observe a performance gap between visual-based and semantic-based agents. Scenario S1 yielded the lowest success rates (28%–51%) across all models: agents struggled to extract precise values from pixel-based canvas visualizations and DOM representations, confirming that current multimodal models are inadequate for precision-critical VA tasks. Adding the state to the DOM ( S2 ) slightly improved success (31%–51%, max. gain 4.4%). In contrast, scenarios relying on VACP’s semantic interface ( S3 , S4 )achieved near-perfect success across tasks. Thus, providing a semantic, VA-tailored interface results in significant improvements in the success rates, indicating that structured semantic state representations and API-driven interaction are far more reliable for analytical reasoning and interaction than purely visual or textual UI/DOM interpretation. 

Efficiency and Token Consumption. — Beyond accuracy, interac-tion modality affected computational efficiency. Agents in scenario  

> S3

(VACP) consumed significantly fewer tokens and finished faster than those in S1 , S2 , and S4 (Fig. 8). Removing DOM parsing and high-dimensional image processing allowed for leaner reasoning traces and interactions. Although the hybrid scenario S4 enabled “visual ver-ification” (double-checking actions against screenshots), it consistently increased token usage and time on task, typically without a proportional increase in success rate. Agents using Claude Sonnet 4.5 consumed far fewer tokens on average (<2000 tokens for S3 ) than agents using other models (e.g., >30000 tokens for S3 on GPT-5.2) (see Fig. 8). 

Agent Behavior and Interaction Stata/Analytic Provenance. — 

While efficiency metrics highlight the computational benefits of seman-tic interfaces, explaining these performance gaps requires examining agents’ iterative problem-solving strategies. To confirm that success rates stem from the provided context rather than prompt artifacts, we annotated every agent turn across four dimensions ( Stratum , Phase , Out-come , Adaptation ) grounded in foundational HCI literature [ 9, 32 , 36 ]. We operationalize these human-centric frameworks for LLM agents by mapping Norman’s Gulf of Execution [ 32 ] to an agent’s ability to formulate valid API calls or DOM interactions, and the Gulf of 

> Fig. 8: Summary of the AI agent evaluation. Detailed analysis of median token consumption and execution time for the different context scenarios, averaged on the use cases and evaluated models.

8Evaluation to its capacity to parse returned state representations or pixels. We similarly adapt Pirolli and Card’s sensemaking loop [ 36 ]to characterize how agents update their internal context windows from intermediate results. For each turn in an agent run, we annotate where the agent is operating ( Stratum ), the turn’s intent ( Phase ), whether the 

Outcome was successful, and if the turn triggered a strategic Adaptation .Annotations were generated with a structured LLM approach. To ensure methodological rigor, the authors manually validated on a random 20% sample, achieving strong inter-rater reliability (Cohen’s κ = 0.918 ). Because this work focuses on interface accessibility, we detail only the interaction stratum below. Full reports on intent, outcome, and adaptation appear in the supplemental material. 

Interaction Strata and the Verification Loop. — Following Buxton’s taxonomy [ 9 ], we grouped interactions into three strata: pragmatic (ma-nipulating raw pixels or coordinate-based events), syntactic (navigating the logical DOM or view structure), and semantic (interacting with raw data models, schemas, or analytical APIs). Their distribution shows a strong link between semantic access and task success. In S1 (baseline scenario), agents relied almost entirely on syntactic (avg. 48.44%) and pragmatic (avg. 47.19%) interactions, with minimal semantics (avg. 4.37%). Adding application state to the DOM in S2 slightly increased semantics (avg. 11.82%) and syntactic interactions peaked (avg. 53.12%), while semantic interactions saw a modest rise (avg. 11.82%). With only accessing the VACP interface in  

> S3

, agents operated almost entirely at the semantic level (99.8%). Scenario S4 presented the most revealing patterns. With full access to all layers, agents favored semantic interactions (avg. 64.86%) while still using a notable share of pragmatic interactions (avg. 29.04%). They typically used semantic interactions for initial insights, then dropped to the pragmatic layer to visually verify solutions before answering. Conversely, failed runs by GPT-5.2 in this scenario showed a collapse of this strategy, with far fewer semantic interactions (25%) and over-reliance on the syntactic layer (55%). 

Qualitative Strategies and Sensemaking Quirks. — Beyond ag-gregate statistics, the qualitative traces reveal notable sensemaking behaviors. Fig. 6 shows a successful S4 run by Claude Sonnet 4.5, demonstrating a robust semantic-to-pragmatic loop: the agent selects the required year, queries the data semantically, and validates interme-diate steps with screenshots. In visually constrained environments ( S1 ), agents used creative hacks to bridge the Gulf of Execution. When Claude Sonnet 4.5 failed to perform reliable brush selection, it inferred the subset from SVG geometries and tried to visually confirm its selection by mutating DOM styles to recolor lines. Gemini 3 Pro Preview ( S1 ) successfully es-timated weather patterns by falling back to pixel counting via color thresholds. With semantic access ( S3 ), agents exhibited high-level analytical reasoning: Claude Sonnet noted the risk of visual misinter-pretation and computed regression slopes directly from the data. But semantic access also introduced new pitfalls, such as GPT-5.2 failing a task by assuming it should only find IQR-based outliers and missing a second data point. In mixed environments, agents showed human-like corroboration, using SQL to identify the top country and then triggering a semantic hover tooltip to visually reconcile a rounding discrepancy. 

Design Implications for Agentic VA. — These behaviors signal a key shift in how we must design interfaces for AI operators. Agents’ tendency to add pixel-approximation layers or alter the DOM for visual confirmation suggests that VA systems should expose intermediate ana-lytical states instead of forcing agents to infer them from visuals. The effectiveness of the semantic-to-pragmatic verification loop indicates that purely “headless” VA is inadequate: agents need to confirm seman-tic queries with visual representations, as humans do when comparing tables with charts. Future agent-ready VA systems should therefore offer a dual-channel architecture: a robust, API-driven semantic layer for reliable execution, paired with deterministic visual feedback to support agents’ internal evaluation and sensemaking. 

Summary. — Our results show that a tailored semantic interface like VACP is not merely an enhancement but a requirement for reliable autonomous VA, bridging the gap between pixel-oriented web agents and the data-centric needs of VA applications. 

7 DISCUSSION 

VACP introduces a semantic stratum that bridges the gap between complex data environments and agentic reasoning. By shifting from model-specific prompt engineering to structured context engineering, VACP allows AI agents to interact with VA interfaces using the same mixed-initiative paradigm as human users. Our evaluations show that this structured exposure significantly increases task completion. As frontier models converge in reasoning and tool-calling, the critical bot-tleneck for agentic VA becomes how well systems expose their semantic state and affordances, instead of model quality. Process analyses reveal that agents can recover from local coding errors but fail predictably when lacking interface context. VACP overcomes this by encoding system knowledge and interaction options into an agent-tailored for-mat, providing a robust gateway for accurate analytical execution. By offering a tailored, agent-agnostic toolset, VACP significantly reduces token usage relative to baseline approaches, lowering costs for future systems. The underlying principles of VACP are highly generalizable (see Sec. 4), enabling agent integration across broader data-rich envi-ronments, such as geographic information systems and 3D information modeling. Preliminary experiments with smaller, on-device LLMs using VACP also showed promising success, opening the door for local AI agents to collaborate with humans in the same interface. 

Limitations and Future Work — While VACP establishes a robust foundation for agent-accessible VA, its current design operates under several inherent conceptual and technical limits. Restricting exposure of the visual interface to semantic and structural context discards rich visual nuances. Spatial clustering, Gestalt principles, and dense visual patterns are easily perceived by humans but often lost when converted to text. Our experiments indicate that giving agents visual context in addition to the semantic VACP state ( L3 and L4 ), such as interface screenshots, improves performance, suggesting that multimodal access to layer L1 is crucial when token consumption is not a constraint. Implementing VACP adds developer overhead. Complex, dynami-cally reconfigurable VA systems require careful mapping of application state and interactions to the protocol. For highly custom or rapidly changing interfaces, defining and maintaining these mappings can be-come a bottleneck. Future work will rigorously evaluate VACP on non-standard, highly dynamic VA systems to identify boundary conditions and scalability limits. Although VACP minimizes token usage and optimizes memory, its real-time synchronous collaboration can be bottlenecked by LLM in-ference latency, motivating research on asynchronous agent operations and interface designs that gracefully handle processing delays. 

Research Opportunities — Exposing VA interfaces through a struc-tured, semantic protocol opens several research directions: 

Multi-Agent and Mixed-Initiative Systems: VACP supports concur-rent access to a single application state, enabling mixed-initiative envi-ronments where specialized agents (e.g., data-cleaning, visualization-generation, or analyst agents) collaborate seamlessly with human users. Future work can examine how this shared state affects user behavior, clarifying the benefits and drawbacks of such collaboration. 

Intelligent Agent-Driven Co-Adaptive Guidance: VACP provides the infrastructure to advance co-adaptive guidance in VA. By enabling intelligent agents to continuously perceive interface state and reason about user interactions, it supports a shift from rigid, rule-based guid-ance systems (e.g., Lotse [ 47 ]) to flexible, context-aware assistance tailored to the user’s analytical flow. 

Automated Testing of Analytical Provenance: Beyond standard func-tional UI testing, the protocol’s structured exposure of system states lets AI agents systematically navigate VA tools, enabling automated testing of complex data mappings and assessing the usability of analytical provenance tracking in highly interactive environments. 

Benchmarking Interactive VA: To evaluate VACP, we curated a repre-sentative set of interactive VA tasks. Moving forward, the community would benefit from a standardized benchmark, analogous to VLAT, specifically for assessing AI agent reasoning, interaction performance, and tool use in interactive VA interfaces. 98 CONCLUSION 

We presented VACP, the first context protocol to provide AI agents native access to interactive VA applications. By formalizing minimal requirements for both the interactive VA environment and the agent, VACP creates a principled bridge between complex visual interfaces and agentic workflows. We instantiated this framework as an open-source TypeScript library, VACP .Across diverse agent setups and representative VA tasks, VACP sig-nificantly outperforms state-of-the-art web-based AI agent interaction methods in reliability and performance. Beyond overcoming current technical limitations, VACP serves as a core building block for future mixed-initiative systems, enabling AI agents to seamlessly navigate, in-terpret, and manipulate VA interfaces alongside human users. To foster further research and system development within the community, VACP is available as open source at github.com/ETH-IVIA-Lab/VACP. 

REFERENCES 

[1] Anomaly Innovations Inc. OpenCode: AI coding agent built for the terminal. https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode ,2026. v1.1.53. [Online; accessed 07-January-2026]. 8 [2] Anthropic PBC. Introducing computer use, a new Claude 3.5 Son-net, and Claude 3.5 Haiku. https://www.anthropic.com/ news/3-5-models-and-computer-use , 2024. [Online; ac-cessed 09-February-2026]. 1, 2 [3] Anthropic PBC. Claude Sonnet 4.5. https://www.anthropic. com/news/claude-sonnet-4-5 , 2025. [Online; accessed 09-February-2026]. 1, 8 [4] Anthropic PBC. Model Context Protocol. https:// modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25 ,2025. [Online; accessed 12-February-2026]. 2, 5 [5] B. Bach, E. Freeman, A. Abdul-Rahman, C. Turkay, S. Khan, Y. Fan et al. Dashboard Design Patterns. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 29(1):342–352, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2022.3209448 2, 3[6] L. Battle and J. Heer. Characterizing Exploratory Visual Analysis: A Literature Review and Evaluation of Analytic Provenance in Tableau. Comput. Graph. Forum , 38(3):145–159, 2019. doi: 10. 1111/CGF.13678 1[7] M. Brehmer and T. Munzner. A Multi-Level Typology of Ab-stract Visualization Tasks. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. ,19(12):2376–2385, 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2013.124 2, 3, 7 [8] Browser Use Inc. Browser Use: The AI Browser Agent. https: //github.com/browser-use/browser-use , 2025. [Online; accessed 09-March-2026]. 1 [9] W. Buxton. Lexical and pragmatic considerations of input struc-tures. SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph. , 17(1):31—-37, Jan. 1983. doi: 10.1145/988584.988586 7, 8, 9 [10] D. Ceneda, T. Gschwandtner, T. May, S. Miksch, H. Schulz, M. Streit et al. Characterizing Guidance in Visual Analytics. 

IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 23(1):111–120, 2017. doi: 10. 1109/TVCG.2016.2598468 1, 2 [11] A. K. Das, M. Tarun, and K. Mueller. Charts-of-Thought: En-hancing LLM Visualization Literacy Through Structured Data Extraction. CoRR , abs/2508.04842, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV. 2508.04842 2[12] X. Deng, Y. Gu, B. Zheng, S. Chen, S. Stevens, B. Wang et al. Mind2Web: Towards a Generalist Agent for the Web. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36,NeurIPS , 2023. doi: 

10.5555/3666122.3667342 2[13] V. Dibia. LIDA: A Tool for Automatic Generation of Grammar-Agnostic Visualizations and Infographics using Large Language Models. In Proc. Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), ACL , pp. 113–126. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023. doi: 

10.18653/V1/2023.ACL-DEMO.11 3[14] E. Dimara and C. Perin. What is Interaction for Data Visualiza-tion? IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 26(1):119–129, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934283 2, 3 [15] F. Elavsky, L. Nadolskis, and D. Moritz. Data navigator: an accessibility-centered data navigation toolkit. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 30(1):803–813, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2023. 3327393 2[16] C. Gillmann, R. G. C. Maack, F. Raith, J. F. Pérez, and G. Scheuer-mann. A Taxonomy of Uncertainty Events in Visual Analytics. 

IEEE Comput. Graph. and Applications , 43(5):62–71, 2023. doi: 

10.1109/MCG.2023.3299297 2[17] Google. Computer Use Preview. https://github.com/ google-gemini/computer-use-preview , 2026. [Online; ac-cessed 07-January-2026]. 8 [18] I. Gur, H. Furuta, A. V. Huang, M. Safdari, Y. Matsuo, D. Eck et al. A Real-World WebAgent with Planning, Long Context Understanding, and Program Synthesis. In Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024 . OpenReview.net, 2024. 2 [19] J. Heer and D. Moritz. Mosaic: An Architecture for Scalable & Interoperable Data Views. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. ,30(1):436–446, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2023.3327189 2, 5 [20] J. Heer, D. Moritz, and R. Pechuk. Mosaic Selections: Managing and Optimizing User Selections for Scalable Data Visualization Systems. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 32(1):988–998, Jan. 2026. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2025.3634649 2[21] J. Heer and B. Shneiderman. Interactive dynamics for visual anal-ysis. Commun. ACM , 55(4):45–54, 2012. doi: 10.1145/2133806. 2133821 2, 3 [22] K. Hong, A. Troynikov, and J. Huber. Context Rot: How Increasing Input Tokens Impacts LLM Performance. https: //research.trychroma.com/context-rot , July 2025. [On-line; accessed 09-February-2026]. 2 [23] James Nurthen, Michael Cooper, Shawn Lawton Henry. WAI-ARIA Overview. https://www.w3.org/WAI/ standards-guidelines/aria/ , 2025. [Online; accessed 12-March-2026]. 4 [24] S. Jones, I. Pedraza Pineros, D. Hajas, J. Zong, and A. Satya-narayan. “Customization is Key”: Reconfigurable Textual Tokens for Accessible Data Visualizations. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp. 1– 14. ACM, Honolulu HI USA, May 2024. doi: 10.1145/3613904. 3641970 2[25] A. Kartha, A. Masry, M. S. Islam, T. Lang, S. Rahman, R. Mah-bub et al. DashboardQA: Benchmarking Multimodal Agents for Question Answering on Interactive Dashboards. CoRR ,abs/2508.17398, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2508.17398 1, 2 [26] N. W. Kim, S. C. Joyner, A. Riegelhuth, and Y. Kim. Accessi-ble Visualization: Design Space, Opportunities, and Challenges. 

Comput. Graph. Forum , 40(3):173–188, 2021. doi: 10.1111/CGF. 14298 2[27] S. Lee, S. Kim, and B. C. Kwon. VLAT: Development of a Visualization Literacy Assessment Test. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 23(1):551–560, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598920 610 [28] M. Lu, J. Liang, Y. Zhang, G. Li, S. Chen, Z. Li et al. Interaction+: Interaction enhancement for web-based visualizations. In IEEE Pacific Visualization Symp., PacificVis 2017 , pp. 61–70. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. doi: 10.1109/PACIFICVIS.2017.8031580 3[29] A. Lundgard and A. Satyanarayan. Accessible Visualization via Natural Language Descriptions: A Four-Level Model of Semantic Content. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 28(1):1073–1083, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114770 2[30] M. Martins, B. Jardim, M. de Castro Neto, and A. Barriguinha. Talking to Data: A Systematic Review of the Rise of Conver-sational Agents for Visual Analytics. IEEE Access , 13:208902– 208931, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3638950 3[31] T. Munzner. Visualization Analysis and Design . A.K. Peters visualization series. A K Peters, 2014. 3, 7 [32] D. A. Norman. The Design of Everyday Things . Basic Books, Inc., USA, 2002. 7, 8 [33] OpenAI. Computer-Using Agent: Introducing a universal inter-face for AI to interact with the digital world. https://openai. com/index/computer-using-agent , 2025. [Online; accessed 09-March-2026]. 1, 2 [34] OpenAI. GPT-5.2. https://openai.com/index/ introducing-gpt-5-2/ , 2025. [Online; accessed 09-February-2026]. 1, 8 [35] W. A. Pike, J. Stasko, R. Chang, and T. A. O’Connell. The science of interaction. Information Visualization , 8(4):263—-274, Dec. 2009. doi: 10.1057/ivs.2009.22 2, 3 [36] P. Pirolli and S. Card. The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identified through cognitive task analysis. In Proc. Int. Conf. on intelligence analysis , vol. 5, pp. 2–4, 2005. 7, 8, 9 [37] J. R. Quinlan. Combining Instance-Based and Model-Based Learning. In Machine Learning, Proc. Int. Conf. , pp. 236–243. Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. doi: 10.1016/B978-1-55860-307-3.50037 -X 7[38] D. Ren, F. Hohman, H. Lin, and D. Moritz. Embedding at-las: Low-friction, interactive embedding visualization. CoRR ,abs/2505.06386, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2505.06386 2[39] D. Sacha, H. Senaratne, B. C. Kwon, G. P. Ellis, and D. A. Keim. The Role of Uncertainty, Awareness, and Trust in Visual Analytics. 

IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 22(1):240–249, 2016. doi: 10. 1109/TVCG.2015.2467591 2[40] A. Satyanarayan, D. Moritz, K. Wongsuphasawat, and J. Heer. Vega-Lite: A Grammar of Interactive Graphics. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 23(1):341–350, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016. 2599030 2, 5 [41] A. Satyanarayan, R. Russell, J. Hoffswell, and J. Heer. Reactive Vega: A Streaming Dataflow Architecture for Declarative Interac-tive Visualization. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 22(1):659– 668, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2015.2467091 2[42] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessí, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Hambro et al. Toolformer: language models can teach them-selves to use tools. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, art. no. 2997, 13 pages. Curran Associates Inc., 2023. doi: 10.5555/3666122.3669119 2[43] K. Sedig and P. Parsons. Interaction Design for Complex Cog-nitive Activities with Visual Representations: A Pattern-Based Approach. AIS Trans. on Human-Computer Interactions , 5(2):84– 133, 06 2013. 2 [44] Selenium Project. Selenium. https://www.selenium.dev/ .[Online; accessed 11-February-2026]. 2 [45] P. Shaw, M. Joshi, J. Cohan, J. Berant, P. Pasupat, H. Hu et al. From Pixels to UI Actions: Learning to Follow Instructions via Graphical User Interfaces. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, NeurIPS , 2023. 2 [46] T. Shi, A. Karpathy, L. Fan, J. Hernandez, and P. Liang. World of Bits: An Open-Domain Platform for Web-Based Agents. In 

Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, ICML 2017 , vol. 70, pp. 3135–3144. PMLR, 2017. 2 [47] F. Sperrle, D. Ceneda, and M. El-Assady. Lotse: A Practical Framework for Guidance in Visual Analytics. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 29(1):1124–1134, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2022. 3209393 9[48] F. Sperrle, A. Jeitler, J. Bernard, D. A. Keim, and M. El-Assady. Co-adaptive visual data analysis and guidance processes. Comput. Graph. , 100:93–105, 2021. doi: 10.1016/J.CAG.2021.06.016 2[49] F. Sperrle, H. Schäfer, D. Keim, and M. El-Assady. Learning Contextualized User Preferences for Co-Adaptive Guidance in Mixed-Initiative Topic Model Refinement. Computer Graphics Forum , 40(3):215–226, 2021. doi: 10.1111/cgf.14301 1[50] T. Stähle, M. J. op de Haar, S. Boyer, R. Sevastjanova, A. Narecha-nia, and M. El-Assady. A Design Space for Intelligent Agents in Mixed-Initiative Visual Analytics. CoRR , abs/2512.23372, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2512.23372 2[51] G. Team. Gemini: A Family of Highly Capable Multimodal Models. CoRR , abs/2312.11805, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2312. 11805 1, 8 [52] B. Walderman, L. Lee, A. Nolan, D. Bokan, K. Sagar, and H. V. Opstal. WebMCP. https://github.com/ webmachinelearning/webmcp , 2026. [Online; accessed 11-March-2026]. 2 [53] L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. 

Frontiers Comput. Sci. , 18(6):186345, 2024. doi: 10.1007/S11704 -024-40231-1 1, 2 [54] Y. Wang, M. Li, and H. Chen. A Case for Declarative LLM-friendly Interfaces for Improved Efficiency of Computer-Use Agents. CoRR , abs/2510.04607, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2510. 04607 3[55] WHATWG community. DOM – Living Standard. https://dom. spec.whatwg.org , 2026. [Online; accessed 12-March-2026]. 2 [56] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan et al. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023 .OpenReview.net, 2023. 8 [57] J. S. Yi, Y. ah Kang, J. T. Stasko, and J. A. Jacko. Toward a Deeper Understanding of the Role of Interaction in Information Visualization. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 13(6):1224– 1231, 2007. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2007.70515 2[58] A. L. Zhang, T. Kraska, and O. Khattab. Recursive Language Models. CoRR , abs/2512.24601, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2512. 24601 2[59] Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Luo, Y. Wang, and J. Fekete. Libra: An Interaction Model for Data Visualization. In Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2025 ,pp. 1169:1–1169:17. ACM, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3706598.3713769 

2, 3 11 [60] S. Zhou, F. F. Xu, H. Zhu, X. Zhou, R. Lo, A. Sridhar et al. We-bArena: A Realistic Web Environment for Building Autonomous Agents. In Int. Conf. on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024 .OpenReview.net, 2024. 2 [61] J. Zong, C. Lee, A. Lundgard, J. Jang, D. Hajas, and A. Satya-narayan. Rich Screen Reader Experiences for Accessible Data Visualization. Comput. Graph. Forum , 41(3):15–27, 2022. doi: 

10.1111/CGF.14519 212