Title: VISTA: A Generative Egocentric Video Framework for Daily Assistance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.10579v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 03:12:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# VISTA: A Generative Egocentric Video Framework for Daily Assistance 

Yu-Hsiang Liu, Yu-Chien Tang, An-Zi Yen 

Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan 

ivesliu.ee10@nycu.edu.tw , tommytyc.cs10@nycu.edu.tw , azyen@nycu.edu.tw 

Abstract 

Training AI agents to proactively assist humans in daily activities, from routine household tasks to urgent safety situations, requires large-scale visual data. However, capturing such scenarios in the real world is often difficult, costly, or unsafe, and physics-based simulators lack the visual fidelity needed to transfer learned behav-iors to real settings. Therefore, we introduce VISTA, a video synthesis system that produces high-fidelity egocentric videos as training and evaluation data for AI agents. VISTA employs a 5-step script generation pipeline with causal reverse reasoning to create diverse, logically grounded intervention modes. These scenarios span two levels of agent autonomy: reactive and proactive. In reactive modes, the user ex-plicitly asks the agent for help. In proactive modes, the agent offers help without receiving a direct request. We further divide proactive modes into explicit and implicit types. In ex-plicit proactive scenarios, the user is aware of needing help but does not directly address the agent. In implicit proactive scenarios, the agent intervenes before the user even realizes that help is needed. VISTA allows users to cus-tomize and refine scenarios to generate video benchmarks for daily tasks, offering a scalable and controllable alternative to real-world data collection for training and evaluating AI agents in realistic environments. 

1 Introduction 

Recent breakthroughs in Video Foundation Models (VFMs) have demonstrated an unprecedented abil-ity to synthesize photorealistic and temporally co-herent video content (OpenAI, 2024). While these advancements have primarily been showcased in creative industries, they offer a transformative po-tential for AI agent evaluation as Generative Sim-ulators . Traditional benchmarks in Embodied AI often rely on physics-based simulators such as AI2-THOR or Habitat to test agent interactions (Kolve 

Figure 1: Reactive and Proactive Assistance Modes in VISTA. Left: reactive mode, where the user makes a request and the agent responds. Right: proactive mode, where the agent intervenes without a specific request, covering both explicit-need and implicit-need cases. 

et al., 2017; Savva et al., 2019). However, these platforms frequently suffer from a significant sim-to-real gap due to their limited visual assets and simplified environmental dynamics, which fail to capture the visual complexity and unpredictability of the real world. Recent work has also shown that video world simulators can evaluate robot poli-cies under nominal, OOD, and safety stress tests, further motivating generative benchmarks that re-tain visual realism (Team et al., 2025). In parallel, recent video-generation and video-reasoning evalu-ation suites (Huang et al., 2024b; Sun et al., 2024; He et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2025) have highlighted the need for rigorous, multi-dimensional assess-ment beyond purely visual quality. Conversely, acquiring naturalistic egocentric (first-person) data through real-world recording is prohibitively expensive and difficult to scale. Stan-dard procedures require human participants to wear specialized recording devices, such as GoPro cam-eras or smart glasses, to perform daily tasks over extended periods, as seen in large-scale egocentric datasets like Ego-Exo4D (Grauman et al., 2024). Recent efforts have expanded egocentric supervi-sion with procedural ego-exo alignment, action scene graphs, and large-scale egocentric generation 1  

> arXiv:2605.10579v1 [cs.CL] 11 May 2026 Figure 2: Examples of reactive and proactive assistance modes in VISTA. Each row shows a short temporal slice of the same hazard scenario. From top to bottom, the rows illustrate reactive, explicit proactive, and implicit proactive assistance. Reactive assistance responds to a direct user request, while proactive assistance is provided without one and can be either explicit or implicit depending on the user’s awareness of the need for help.

data, but they remain costly and limited for rare-risk event (Huang et al., 2024a; Rodin et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025a). Moreover, evaluating agents in high-risk or emergency scenar-ios such as household accidents (e.g., fires, glass breakage) or medical emergencies (e.g., sudden falls, seizures) is practically impossible in reality due to severe ethical concerns and physical safety risks. These limitations leave a critical gap in test-ing how AI agents should proactively intervene in diverse and hazardous situations. To address these challenges, we present VISTA 

(Vi deo Synthesis for Training Agents), an end-to-end system for generating and evaluating proac-tive agent behaviors. VISTA shifts the paradigm from physical recording to generative synthesis ,enabling researchers to create a wide array of in-teraction scenarios through a structured Script-to-Video workflow. By combining open-world rea-soning from Large Language Models (LLMs) with high-fidelity rendering from VFMs, VISTA pro-duces realistic first-person videos that include rare, long-tail, and high-stakes events without physical risk (OpenAI, 2024). The core contribution of VISTA lies in its sys-tematic taxonomy of assistance modes, organized in two levels: • Reactive Mode: Situations involving direct, nat-ural language instructions or clear calls for assis-tance (e.g., “Help me find my keys”). • Proactive Mode: (1) Explicit Proactive Sce-narios: Situations where the user is aware of needing assistance but does not directly request it from the agent, for example by thinking aloud or speaking to themselves. (2) Implicit Proactive Scenarios: Situations where the user is not aware of needing assistance, and the agent intervenes before the need is recognized (e.g., noticing a user struggling to open a jar). Figure 2 presents the examples of these assis-tance modes. In the reactive scenarios, the user notices the spilled drink near the power strip and directly asks what to do. In the explicit proactive scenarios, the user knocks over the drink and real-izes the mistake, but does not directly request help. In the implicit proactive scenarios, the user care-lessly places the drink near the table edge above the power strip and continues reading, unaware of the potential danger. VISTA is designed to gener-ate such videos for training and evaluating agent behavior across different assistance modes. In sum, our contributions are as follows: (1) We introduce a collaborative interface that bridges the gap between script generation and video synthe-2sis, enabling researchers to iteratively define and render precise safety-critical scenarios and human-environment interactions. 12 (2) We propose a com-prehensive, multi-dimensional assessment pipeline that leverages Large Multimodal Models to evalu-ate an agent’s contextual reasoning and situational awareness in real-time settings. (3) Our results suggest that VISTA provides a scalable, safe, and customizable simulation sandbox for developing and evaluating AI assistants. 

2 Related Work 

This section situates VISTA within the broader landscape of video generation and embodied AI, focusing on generative world models, egocentric vision, and causal reasoning in data generation. 

2.1 Generative World Models 

Frontier video generation models are increasingly framed as world simulators for embodied agents (OpenAI, 2024), enabling safety stress tests (Team et al., 2025) and policy evaluation (Li et al., 2025b). Concurrently, video generation and rea-soning benchmarks have improved metric coverage for visual fidelity and instruction following (Huang et al., 2024b; Sun et al., 2024; He et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2025). However, these models primar-ily target open-ended generation rather than the precise control required for evaluating proactive assistance. VISTA addresses this by imposing a strict, structured script-generation pipeline that con-strains video outputs to be logically consistent and physically plausible. 

2.2 Egocentric Vision and Synthesis 

Understanding human activity from a first-person perspective is essential for proactive assistants. This research is supported by large-scale datasets capturing skilled activities (Grauman et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024a), action scene graphs (Rodin et al., 2024), 4D reconstructions (Li et al., 2025a), and fine-grained reasoning benchmarks (Rodin et al., 2025). Because collecting dangerous or rare scenarios in the real world is costly and restric-tive, synthetic generation datasets like EgoVid-5M (Wang et al., 2024) have emerged. While meth-ods like ProAssist generate proactive dialogues from streaming real-world videos (Zhang et al., 2025b), multimodal models still struggle with                   

> 1VISTA: https://huggingface.co/spaces/ NLPLAB-VISTA-research/VISTA-Demo
> 2https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xeqv85FR44g
> Method Source Egocentric Causal Control Proactive Modes
> Ego-Exo4D (Grauman et al., 2024) Real ✓××
> ProAssist (Zhang et al., 2025b) Real ✓×✓
> WorldEval (Li et al., 2025b) Gen ×××
> VISTA (Ours) Gen ✓✓✓

Table 1: Comparison with Existing Methods . VISTA stands out by combining generative synthesis with strict causal control and a systematic taxonomy of proactive intervention modes, differentiating it from both real-world datasets and other generative frameworks. 

image-grounded temporal reasoning (Ma et al., 2025). VISTA bridges this gap by explicitly synthe-sizing scenarios across reactive, implicitly proac-tive, and explicitly proactive modes, providing a comprehensive benchmark for agent anticipation. 

2.3 Causal Reasoning in Data Generation 

A critical limitation of current world simulators is the difficulty of reliably exposing causal trig-gers for safety and out-of-distribution evaluation (Team et al., 2025). VISTA overcomes this by inte-grating causal reverse reasoning directly into the data generation process: we first define the nec-essary intervention, then causally derive the user action that precipitates it. This ensures every gen-erated sample provides a controlled, valid training signal. To evaluate these scenarios, we adopt a utility-centric judging protocol grounded in recent LLM-as-a-judge assessment paradigms (Gu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025a). 

3 System Architecture 

VISTA adopts a modular, cascade pipeline design to synthesize high-fidelity egocentric video instruc-tions. Unlike end-to-end approaches that attempt to generate videos directly from high-level prompts, which can suffer from hallucinations and lack of fine-grained control, our system decomposes the generation process into discrete, verifiable steps. This design ensures controllability, scalability, and the ability to systematically cover diverse inter-vention scenarios. The architecture serves three main layers: a Data Layer that manages egocen-tric video sources and dataset construction; a Gen-eration Layer that executes the script-to-video workflow; and an Evaluation Layer for automated benchmarking using VLM agents. 

3.1 Multi-Step Script Generation Pipeline 

The core contribution of VISTA is its 5-step script generation pipeline driven by LLMs. This pipeline 3Figure 3: VISTA System Architecture. The pipeline comprises five modular steps that transform an input scenario into an egocentric video script. The first three steps are (1) Intervention Generation using LLMs, (2) User Action Derivation via causal reverse reasoning, and (3) Signal Specification. These are synthesized into (4) Mode Binding (Structured Seed) categorized by intervention mode (Reactive, Implicit, Explicit), which ultimately drives (5) Script Generation. The final YAML script guides the First-Frame Image Generation and downstream Video Synthesis. 

transforms abstract scenario descriptions into struc-tured, machine-readable scripts that govern the video synthesis. By enforcing strongly-typed out-puts (validated via schema checks) at each step, we ensure consistency and reduce error propagation. 

Step 1: Intervention Generation. Starting from a broad scenario description (e.g., “Kitchen & Food Prep”), the system employs an LLM to brainstorm a diverse set of potential situations where an AI agent’s intervention would be contextually valu-able. We utilize few-shot prompting to steer the model away from generic commands (like “chop the vegetables”) towards more nuanced social or safety-critical interactions. This step broadens the generated assistance beyond simple command-following to include proactive help, safety warn-ings, and social adherence checks. 

Step 2: User Action Derivation (Causal Reverse Reasoning). A key innovation in VISTA is the use of causal reverse reasoning to mitigate the hallu-cination issues common in direct video generation. Instead of generating user actions and then finding a problem, we start with the intervention need iden-tified in Step 1 and work backward to determine what user action (or inaction) would plausibly lead to that situation. This ensures that every generated video has a clear, logical motivation for agent assis-tance. For each intervention, we generate multiple user actions to explore different causal paths. For example, if the intervention is “warn the user about the hot pan”, the system might derive user actions such as “reaching for the pan handle without a mitt” or “placing a plastic utensil near the burner”. 

Step 3: Signal Specification. To enable proactive assistance, the agent must be able to perceive the need for help before it becomes a crisis. This step explicitly defines the visual or audio signals asso-ciated with the user’s action that would trigger the agent’s reasoning. These signals might include spe-cific visual indicators (e.g., “steam rising rapidly”, “unsteady hand movement”) or auditory cues (e.g., “sound of glass cracking”). By explicitly modeling these signals, VISTA provides ground truth data for evaluation. 

Step 4: Mode Binding (Structured Seed). The system then synthesizes the previous outputs into a structured “seed” with an associated assistance mode. We first distinguish between reactive and 

proactive assistance, and further divide proactive modes into explicit and implicit cases. • Reactive: The user directly requests help or asks the agent a question (e.g., “Can you help me find the salt?”). • Explicit Proactive: The user is aware of needing help but does not directly request it from the agent (e.g., “Hmm... Where did I put it?”). • Implicit Proactive: The user is not aware of needing help, and the agent intervenes before the need is recognized (e.g., noticing the user is searching through a drawer in frustration, or identifying a drink placed near the edge of a table above a power strip, where it could be acciden-tally knocked over and spill onto the strip). 

Step 5: Script Generation. Finally, the structured seed is converted into a comprehensive YAML script . This script serves as a rigorous contract between the text generation and video synthesis modules. It contains precise instructions for the video generation model across four key temporal segments: (1) Scene Setup , detailing the environ-4ment and objects; (2) User Action , describing the human’s behavior and camera motion; (3) Inter-vention Trigger , specifying the exact moment and nature of the signal; and (4) Exit State , defining the outcome. The strict schema validation ensures that all necessary parameters such as camera angle (e.g., “egocentric, eye-level”) and lighting conditions are present and consistent before any expensive video rendering occurs. 

3.2 Script-to-Video Synthesis 

The synthesized YAML script is then realized into video content through a two-stage process: 

First-Frame Image Generation. To maintain vi-sual consistency and high fidelity, we first generate a reference image for the video’s starting frame. The logic extracts the scene description and camera angle constraints from the YAML script to prompt an image generation model. This establishes the visual style, lighting, and egocentric perspective (e.g., visible hands, eye-level view) before tempo-ral dynamics are introduced. 

Video Synthesis. Next, the reference image and the script’s action prompts are fed into a video gen-eration model. The system converts the YAML instructions into prompts that guide the camera mo-tion and user behavior throughout the video. This decoupled approach enables VISTA to leverage state-of-the-art video generation models (such as Sora or Veo), while preserving structured script control (OpenAI, 2024; Team et al., 2025). 

4 System Interface 

VISTA provides a web-based interface that mirrors the backend pipeline while keeping every decision stage inspectable. The user flow starts from sce-nario selection and then proceeds through six ex-plicit stages: Intervention → User Action → Signal 

→ Mode → Script → Generate . This staged design makes intermediate reasoning artifacts first-class UI objects rather than hidden internal states. 

Design rationale. The interface emphasizes in-spectability over one-shot prompting: each stage exposes explicit artifacts, mode semantics are vis-ible before rendering, and the final panel tightly couples generated outputs with quantitative evalua-tion. This supports both interactive debugging and reproducible demo reporting.                                      

> Mode Total Valid (Gate) Excluded Overall ↑Helpfulness ↑Tone ↑LatencyErr ↓SafetyCrit. ↑
> Reactive 20 713 55.39 0.793 0.914 0.933 0.711 Explicit 20 515 60.84 0.832 0.950 0.800 0.725 Implicit 20 515 63.64 0.840 0.910 0.781 0.799 All Modes 60 17 43 59.42 0.818 0.924 0.849 0.741

Table 2: Practical evaluation results . All re-ported means are computed over gate-valid samples (alignment_score ≥ 0.5). LatencyErr denotes Elat =1 − Slat (lower is better). 

5 Evaluation 

We frame VISTA as a real-time assistance bench-mark prioritizing intervention utility, timeliness, and physical-risk grounding over traditional label-matching. Our dataset comprises 60 synthesized videos across 20 risk scenarios, evenly divided into three intervention modes: reactive , implicit , and 

explicit . To ensure robust evaluation, we first ex-clude generated videos with poor video-text align-ment ( < 0.5) to prevent low-fidelity syntheses from skewing results. The remaining videos undergo a three-stage evaluation pipeline: 

SAM3 Layer. We extract spatial traces (e.g., cen-troids, mask areas) using SAM3 (Carion et al., 2025) to compute three physical signals: (1) Hand-Hazard Distance , (2) an Escalation Curve (prox-ying risk via hazard activity and hand proximity), and (3) Hazard Area Growth (temporal expansion rate). These signals provide physical grounding for urgency estimation. 

VLM Layer. The VLM outputs structured scene analyses, including identified hazards, proposed interventions, and a 1–5 urgency scale. An LLM-as-a-Judge (Gu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025a) jointly assesses these outputs for helpfulness , tone ,and an over-alert flag, ensuring contextually con-sistent scoring. We also compute the False Positive Rate (FPR) on benign scenes to quantify unneces-sary alarmism. 

Fusion Layer. Reaction latency is calculated against the expected hazard onset. We apply a mode- and hazard-aware tolerance window: re-sponses within this window maximize the Time-liness score, while deviations incur proportional penalties. The final utility score aggregates inter-vention helpfulness, tone, timeliness, visual observ-ability, and Safety Criticality (averaged SAM3 and VLM urgency signals), minus over-alert penalties. 3

5(a) Scenario selection (b) Step 1: intervention (c) Step 2: user action (d) Step 3: signal 

Figure 4: Front half of the interface workflow. The user first chooses a scenario and then specifies intervention intent, plausible user behavior, and observable trigger signals. 

(a) Step 4: mode (b) Step 5: script (c) Video generation (d) Video evaluation 

Figure 5: Back half of the interface workflow. After mode selection and script inspection, VISTA renders the video and immediately reports per-video evaluation metrics in the same UI.                                                                             

> Mode Setting Total Valid (Gate) Excluded Overall ↑Helpfulness ↑Tone ↑LatencyErr ↓SafetyCrit. ↑
> Reactive Zero-shot 20 317 46.20 0.742 0.875 1.060 0.655 Reactive Ours 20 713 55.39 0.793 0.914 0.933 0.711 Explicit Zero-shot 20 218 50.10 0.781 0.918 0.955 0.682 Explicit Ours 20 515 60.84 0.832 0.950 0.800 0.725 Implicit Zero-shot 20 218 52.70 0.792 0.891 0.924 0.709 Implicit Ours 20 515 63.64 0.840 0.910 0.781 0.799 All Modes Zero-shot 60 753 49.67 0.772 0.895 0.980 0.682 All Modes Ours 60 17 43 59.42 0.818 0.924 0.849 0.741

Table 3: Observed results vs. estimated zero-shot performance .

5.1 Results on the 60-Video Benchmark 

Table 2 reports mode-wise and overall metrics af-ter applying the quality gate. Across all modes, intervention content quality is consistently strong (Helpfulness =0.818, Tone =0.924), while timeliness remains the hardest dimension ( LatencyErr =0.849). No over-alert positives are observed in this bench-mark split ( Over-alert rate =0.0; FPR not applicable because no benign videos are present). 

5.2 Expected Zero-Shot Performance (Preliminary Estimation) 

To estimate performance, we compare observed results with a zero-shot. At the All-Modes level, zero-shot results show fewer gate-passing samples (17 → 7), lower overall utility (59.42 → 49.67), and higher latency-related 

> 3

Appendix A providess detailed formulations. 

error (0.849 → 0.980), suggesting the benefit of structured prompting and mode-aware control. 

6 Conclusion 

This paper introduces VISTA, a video synthesis framework producing scripted egocentric video for AI agents assessment. Instead of relying on one-shot prompting, VISTA decomposes genera-tion into specific intermediate steps and exposes them through inspectable interface. This design supports reproducible scenario construction across reactive, explicit proactive, and implicit proactive modes, while preserving end-to-end usability for demo workflow. Our experiments show that VISTA can produce intervention outputs with strong con-tent quality, but they also highlight that timing and script-video alignment remain the central chal-lenges. VISTA can offer a strong backend engine for researchers in VLM assistants field, and future work will focus on stronger event-level control, im-proved temporal consistency, and model-agnostic generation adapters to make proactive-assistance video synthesis more reliable in safety-critical sce-narios. 

References 

Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris, 

6Chaitanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham Khedr, Andrew Huang, Jie Lei, Tengyu Ma, Baishan Guo, Arpit Kalla, Markus Marks, Joseph Greer, Meng Wang, Peize Sun, Roman Rädle, and 19 others. 2025. Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.16719. Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Lorenzo Torresani, Kris Kitani, Jitendra Malik, Triantafyllos Afouras, Kumar Ashutosh, Vijay Baiyya, Siddhant Bansal, Bikram Boote, Eugene Byrne, Zach Chavis, Joya Chen, Feng Cheng, Fu-Jen Chu, Sean Crane, Avijit Dasgupta, Jing Dong, Maria Escobar, and 81 others. 2024. Ego-exo4d: Understanding skilled human activity from first- and third-person perspectives. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 19383–19400. Jinlan Gu, Shuyue Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Zijie Pan, Juan Bi, Chong Zhang, Xiaodong Zheng, Yu-Gang Wang, Yu Yu, and Wenwu Yang. 2024. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. Preprint , arXiv:2411.15594. Xuan He, Dongfu Jiang, Ge Zhang, Max Ku, Achint Soni, Sherman Siu, Haonan Chen, Abhranil Chandra, Ziyan Jiang, Aaran Arulraj, Kai Wang, Quy Duc Do, Yuansheng Ni, Bohan Lyu, Yaswanth Narsupalli, Rongqi Fan, Zhiheng Lyu, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Wenhu Chen. 2024. Videoscore: Building automatic metrics to simulate fine-grained human feedback for video generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2105–2123. Yifei Huang, Guo Chen, Jilan Xu, Mingfang Zhang, Lijin Yang, Baoqi Pei, Hongjie Zhang, Lu Dong, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. 2024a. Egoexolearn: A dataset for bridging asynchronous ego- and exo-centric view of procedural activities in real world. 

Preprint , arXiv:2403.16182. Ziqi Huang, Fan Zhang, Xiaojie Xu, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Ziyue Dong, Qianli Ma, Nattapol Chanpaisit, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Ying-Cong Chen, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. 2024b. Vbench++: Comprehensive and versatile benchmark suite for video generative models. Preprint , arXiv:2411.13503. Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Matt Deitke, Kiana Ehsani, Daniel Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. 2017. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment for visual ai. 

Preprint , arXiv:1712.05474. Bate Li, Houqiang Zhong, Zhengxue Cheng, Qiang Hu, Qiang Wang, Li Song, and Wenjun Zhang. 2025a. Multiego: A multi-view egocentric video dataset for 4d scene reconstruction. Preprint , arXiv:2512.11301. Yaxuan Li, Yichen Zhu, Junjie Wen, Chaomin Shen, and Yi Xu. 2025b. Worldeval: World model as real-world robot policies evaluator. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.19017. David Ma, Yuanxing Zhang, Jincheng Ren, Jarvis Guo, Yifan Yao, Zhenlin Wei, Zhenzhu Yang, Zhongyuan Peng, Boyu Feng, Jun Ma, Xiao Gu, Zhoufutu Wen, King Zhu, Yancheng He, Meng Cao, Shiwen Ni, Jiaheng Liu, Wenhao Huang, Ge Zhang, and Xiaojie Jin. 2025. Iv-bench: A benchmark for image-grounded video perception and reasoning in multimodal llms. 

Preprint , arXiv:2504.15415. OpenAI. 2024. Video generation models as world simulators. OpenAI Technical Report. Accessed 2026-02-26. Ivan Rodin, Antonino Furnari, Kyle Min, Subarna Tripathi, and Giovanni Maria Farinella. 2024. Action scene graphs for long-form understanding of egocentric videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 18622–18632. Ivan Rodin, Tz-Ying Wu, Kyle Min, Sharath Nittur Sridhar, Antonino Furnari, Subarna Tripathi, and Giovanni Maria Farinella. 2025. Easg-bench: Video q&a benchmark with egocentric action scene graphs. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops , pages 2711–2716. Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain, Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2019. Habitat: A platform for embodied ai research. In Proceedings of ICCV .Kaiyue Sun, Kaiyi Huang, Xian Liu, Yue Wu, Zihan Xu, Zhenguo Li, and Xihui Liu. 2024. T2v-compbench: A comprehensive benchmark for compositional text-to-video generation. Preprint , arXiv:2407.14505. Gemini Robotics Team, Krzysztof Choromanski, Coline Devin, Yilun Du, Debidatta Dwibedi, Ruiqi Gao, Abhishek Jindal, Thomas Kipf, Sean Kirmani, Isabel Leal, Fangchen Liu, Anirudha Majumdar, Andrew Marmon, Carolina Parada, Yulia Rubanova, Dhruv Shah, Vikas Sindhwani, Jie Tan, Fei Xia, and 4 others. 2025. Evaluating gemini robotics policies in a veo world simulator. Preprint , arXiv:2512.10675. Xiaofeng Wang, Kang Zhao, Feng Liu, Jiayu Wang, Guosheng Zhao, Xiaoyi Bao, Zheng Zhu, Yingya Zhang, and Xingang Wang. 2024. Egovid-5m: A large-scale video-action dataset for egocentric video generation. Preprint , arXiv:2411.08380. Fan Zhang, Shulin Tian, Ziqi Huang, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. 2025a. Evaluation agent: Efficient and promptable evaluation framework for visual generative models. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7561–7582. Yichi Zhang, Xin Luna Dong, Zhaojiang Lin, Andrea Madotto, Anuj Kumar, Babak Damavandi, Joyce Chai, and Seungwhan Moon. 2025b. Proactive assistant dialogue generation from streaming egocentric videos. 

7In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,pages 12044–12068. 

A Additional Evaluation Details 

This appendix provides implementation-level de-tails for reproducibility of the evaluation protocol in Section 5, with emphasis on practical assistance quality rather than strict mode classification. 

A.1 Prompt Templates and Structured Outputs 

VISTA uses a five-step structured generation pipeline: Intervention Generation → User Action Derivation → Signal Specification → Mode Bind-ing → Script Generation . Each step enforces schema-constrained outputs before passing arti-facts to the next step. 

Step 1–Step 5 artifacts. For each scenario, the pipeline produces: • step1_interventions.json : intervention candidates and hazard plans. • step2_user_actions.json : reverse-causal user behaviors. • step3_signals_all.json : observable cues and trigger descriptions. • step4_mode_binding.json : mode-conditioned binding (implicit , explicit ,

reactive ). • script.yaml : final script contract for first-frame and video generation. To balance space and reproducibility, we include compact template descriptions in the paper and release full prompt texts in supplemental materials. 

VLM output schema (post-pivot). The semantic evaluator outputs hazard-centric fields: • identified_hazard (string), • proposed_intervention (string), • intervention_urgency (integer, 1–5), • events (timestamped event list). This design removes multiple-choice mode predic-tion and preserves model capacity for actionable scene understanding. 

A.2 LLM-as-a-Judge Rubric 

A single judge call scores three dimensions jointly to reduce cost and avoid inconsistent partial judg-ments: helpfulness , tone appropriateness , and over-alert flag .

Judge input. The judge receives: • script context ( actions , reasoning , hazard expectation), • VLM outputs (identified_hazard ,

proposed_intervention ,

intervention_urgency , events ), • optional SAM3 evidence summary (hazard activity and proximity cues). 

Judge output JSON. 

{"helpfulness_score": 0.0-1.0, "tone_score": 0.0-1.0, "over_alert_flag": true|false, "reasoning": "short justification" }

Rubric summary. 

• Helpfulness : safety correctness, actionability, and hazard resolution utility. • Tone : urgency-calibrated wording under risk (concise and directive in critical cases). • Over-alert : flagged when warnings are un-necessary or unsupported by scene evidence. 

A.3 SAM3 Physical and Spatial Signals 

Let frame index be i with timestamp τi. For each hazard prompt, SAM3 produces mask confidence, area, and centroid per analyzed frame. 

Hand-hazard distance. 

di = min 

> h∈H i

chand  

> i

− chi 2 ,

where Hi is the set of active hazard prompts at frame i.

Hazard area growth. Aggregate hazard area ra-tio ai across active hazard prompts, smooth with moving average (window w = 3 ): 

˜ai = 1

w

> w−1

X

> k=0

ai−k.

8Temporal growth is computed by: 

gi = ˜ai − ˜ai−1

τi − τi−1

.

Smoothing is required to reduce segmentation flicker and produce physically meaningful esca-lation trends. 

Escalation proxy. Safety escalation combines hazard activity and proximity trend over time, yield-ing an interpretable per-video safety criticality 

statistic for fusion scoring. 

A.4 Utility-Centric Fusion Scoring 

Fusion prioritizes practical assistance quality over strict category matching. 

Dynamic reaction latency. Let th be hazard on-set and tv be first VLM hazard/signal detection. 

∆t = tv − th.

Per-video tolerance is mode- and hazard-aware: 

[τlo , τ hi ]. Latency score follows the piecewise defi-nition in Section 5; we report 

Elat = 1 − Slat ,

where lower Elat is better. 

Safety criticality. The reported safety criticality is computed from available crisis signals (includ-ing SAM3 hazard escalation and SAM3 area ex-pansion), measuring severity and urgency of the observed risk. 

Overall score with over-alert penalty. Let Sh

be helpfulness, St tone, Slat latency, and Ssc safety criticality. If over-alert is flagged, a fixed penalty term is applied: 

S = 0 .4Sh+0 .08 St+0 .25 Slat +0 .20 Ssc +0 .07 Sobs −Pover-alert .

Here Pover-alert = 0.25 when 

over_alert_flag=true , otherwise 0.

A.5 Quality Gate and Over-Alert FPR Video-text quality gate. Video-text alignment is used as a data quality gate rather than a primary score component. Videos with 

alignment_score < 0.5

are excluded from aggregate reporting to avoid con-taminating system-level conclusions with genera-tion failures. 

Over-alert false positive rate (FPR). Over-alert FPR quantifies unnecessary alarm behavior on no-hazard cases or no-hazard time windows: FPR = FP FP + TN .

Lower FPR indicates better alert precision and less disruptive behavior. 

A.6 Reporting Protocol for 60-Video Benchmark 

The benchmark contains 20 scenarios with 3 modes each (60 videos total). We report: • mode-wise and overall means on gate-valid samples, • gate pass/fail counts and exclusion ratio, • over-alert FPR and penalty incidence, • per-video metrics in machine-readable analy-sis files for auditability. 9