Title: CASCADE: Case-Based Continual Adaptation for Large Language Models During Deployment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.06702v1

Published Time: Mon, 11 May 2026 00:01:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 62

Markdown Content:
# CASCADE: Case-Based Continual Adaptation for Large Language Models During Deployment 

## Siyuan Guo a,b,c,# , Yali Du d,e, †, Hechang Chen a,b , Yi Chang a,b,c, †, Jun Wang f, †

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) have become a central foundation of modern artificial intelligence, yet their lifecycle remains constrained by a rigid separation between training and deployment, after which learning effectively ceases. This limitation contrasts with natural intelligence, which continually adapts through interaction with its environment. In this paper, we formalise deployment-time learning (DTL) as the third stage in the LLM lifecycle that enables LLM agents to improve from experience during deployment without modifying model parameters. We present CASCADE (CASe-based Continual Adaptation during DEployment), a general and principled framework that equips LLM agents with an explicit, evolving episodic memory. CASCADE formulates experience reuse as a contextual bandit problem, enabling principled exploration-exploitation trade-offs and establishing no-regret guarantees over long-term interactions. This design allows agents to accumulate, select, and refine task-relevant cases, transforming past experience into actionable knowledge. Across 16 diverse tasks spanning medical diagnosis, legal analysis, code generation, web search, tool use, and embodied interaction, CASCADE improves macro-averaged success rate by 20.9% over zero-shot prompting while consistently outperforming gradient-based and memory-based baselines. By reframing deployment as an adaptive learning process, this work establishes a foundation for continually improving AI systems. 

# 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) mark a transformation in artificial intelligence (AI), shifting the field from training task-specific models toward building more general-purpose AI systems. They demonstrate remarkable versatility, from accelerating scientific and algorithmic discoveries 1 to achieving human-level data science performance in Kaggle competitions 2. The prevailing learning paradigm for LLMs follows a two-stage pipeline: large-scale pretraining on static corpora, followed by a finetuning phase aimed at enhancing alignment and reasoning capabilities 3. Despite its proven effectiveness, this paradigm suffers from a fundamental limitation: once deployed, learning essen-tially stops. This sharp separation between training and deployment stands in contrast to natural           

> #This work is done during Siyuan Guo’s visit to Yali Du and Jun Wang at King’s College London and UCL.
> †Corresponding Authors.
> aSchool of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University. bEngineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, Jilin University. cInternational Center of Future Science, Jilin University. dDepartment of Informatics, King’s College London. eThe Alan Turing Institute. fAI Centre, Department of Computer Science, UCL. Email: guosyjlu@gmail.com ;yali.du@kcl.ac.uk ;chenhc@jlu.edu.cn ;yichang@jlu.edu.cn ;
> jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

1                  

> arXiv:2605.06702v1 [cs.AI] 5 May 2026 LLM Lifecycle
> LLM
> Next -token prediction
> QALLM
> SFT
> QLLM A
> RLFT
> Query Solution
> Reward
> 𝑡 =1𝑡 =2𝑡 =𝑇 …𝑡 =3…
> III. Deployment -Time Learning (This work) II. Finetuning I. Pretraining
> Continuous policy improvement
> 𝑞 !
> 𝑟 !
> 𝑎 !
> 𝜋 !
> 𝑞 "
> 𝑟 "
> 𝑎 "
> 𝜋 "
> 𝑞 #
> 𝑟 #
> 𝑎 #
> 𝜋 #
> 𝑞 $
> 𝑟 $
> 𝑎 $
> 𝜋 $

Figure 1: The LLM Lifecycle. In the first stage, LLMs are pre-trained with next-token prediction tasks on a large scale of corpus. Then, LLMs are further finetuned using supervised finetuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning finetuning (RLFT) for alignment and enhancing reasoning capabilities. We consider deployment-time learning as the third stage, where LLMs learn from experience during deployment, enabling continuous policy improvement over online interactions without updating the underlying LLM parameters. intelligence, where adaptation is continuous, grounded in interaction, and driven by the accumu-lation and selective reuse of experience 4,5 . As LLMs are increasingly deployed as autonomous agents 6 that interact with dynamic environments and make decisions, the inability to learn from deployment-time experience emerges as a critical bottleneck, limiting adaptability, robustness, and long-term performance. Although gradient-based techniques such as reinforcement learning (RL) 7

provide principled frameworks for experiential learning 8, they require backpropagation across model parameters, incurring prohibitive cost at LLM scale. More fundamentally, many deployed LLMs are accessed as black-box application-programming-interface (API) services, making gradient-based adaptation even methodologically infeasible. Motivated by this gap, we consider deployment-time learning (DTL) as a third, complementary stage in the LLM lifecycle (Fig. 1). Unlike pretraining and finetuning, DTL breaks the long-standing separation between training and testing, and enables learning during deployment by allowing LLMs to adapt from experience as they interact with the environment. Crucially, DTL shifts the locus of learning away from the foundation model itself and toward the agentic components that surround it, such as prompts, memory, tools, and decision-making mechanisms. We further formalise DTL as agentic online learning, where LLM agents observe a stream of tasks, generate solutions, receive scalar feedback indicating success or failure, and adapt their behaviour over time. This perspective shifts the objective from reducing individual errors to optimising long-term performance. By reframing deployment as an ongoing learning process, DTL transforms LLMs from static artifacts into continually improving systems. Here, we present CASCADE (CASe-based Continual Adaptation during DEployment), a general algorithm that enables LLM agents to achieve continuous online improvement from deployment-time experience without finetuning the underlying LLM (Fig. 2a). CASCADE builds on the classic paradigm of case-based reasoning (CBR) 9,10,11 , where new problems are solved by retrieving and reusing past successful solutions, allowing experience to accumulate explicitly as an episodic memory. With the LLM fixed and its response behaviour effectively stationary, adaptation during deployment hinges entirely on which past cases to retrieve. This naturally gives rise to an explo-ration–exploitation trade-off: agents must leverage high-utility cases while selectively exploring uncertain ones to improve future performance. CASCADE overcomes this challenge through a contextual bandit formulation 12 , thereby establishing, to our knowledge, the first principled DTL algorithm for LLM agents with provable no-regret guarantees (Fig. 2b). 

2Estimated value                    

> Real value
> Solved query
> ⋯
> Coverage gap
> Coverage gap  Coverage gap controlled by Retain step Retrieval regret minimised by Neural -LinLogUCB
> Value
> Timesteps Case
> RT=E
> [∑T
> t=1
> (R(qt, a !
> t)−¯R(qt, c !
> t) + ¯R(qt, c !
> t)−¯R(qt, c t))]
> Retrieval regret
> 1"#
> Legend
> Unsolved query
> Covered query space
> Uncovered query space
> Confidence interval
> Legend
> Case Case
> ⋯

a

b           

> I. Retrieve
> ①Observe query
> ②Retrieve case
> ③Reuse & revise case
> ④Receive reward
> ⑤Update retriever policy
> ⑥Retain case (Only good cases are retained)
> QRetriever
> Case bank
> LLM
> …
> II. Reuse & Revise
> III. Retain
> Case
> A
> ①②③④
> ⑤
> ⑥
> Case as arm
> pLLM (·| qt, c t)μ(·| qt,Mt)

Figure 2: Overview of CASCADE. a , Given a query, CASCADE retrieves the case via the contextual bandit algorithm, reuses and revises it to generate the solution, and receives the reward. The retriever policy is updated accordingly, and successful cases are retained in the case bank. b,CASCADE exhibits the no-regret learning property: the coverage gap is controlled by the Retain step, while the retrieval regret is minimised by the proposed contextual bandit algorithm. Through extensive experiments, we empirically demonstrate that deployment-time learning enables LLM agents to achieve continuous performance improvement from interaction experience, even when the underlying models remain fixed and are accessed as black-box APIs. Within this paradigm, we demonstrate the power of CASCADE across a diverse set of single-turn and multi-turn tasks, spanning medical diagnosis, legal analysis, operational reasoning, code generation, embodied interaction, web-based information seeking, and complex tabular reasoning on electronic health records. These improvements are observed across a wide range of model scales, from 4B models suitable for edge deployment to 32B models used in industrial applications. Together, these results establish deployment-time learning as a viable and general framework for adaptive AI systems, and position CASCADE as a principled and scalable instantiation of this framework. 

# 2 Case-Based Deployment-Time Learning 

Deployment-time learning is defined by a set of constraints that fundamentally reshape how adapta-tion can occur. First, queries are presented as a stream, and the agent must act online without access to future tasks or outcomes. Rather than solving each query independently, the agent must extract reusable knowledge from prior interactions and apply it to new, unseen queries. Second, learning is driven by experience rather than supervision. The agent interacts with the environment, accumulates experience in textual form, and receives only scalar feedback indicating success or failure. In this work, we focus on a particularly general and practically relevant setting in which feedback is binary, reflecting the minimal signals available in many deployed systems. Third, the foundation model is fixed: once deployed, the parameters of the LLM remain unchanged. This distinguishes deployment-

3time learning from classical online and continual learning, particularly reinforcement learning 13 ,where adaptation is typically achieved through gradient-based updates to model parameters. For LLMs, however, such updates are often impractical at deployment and impossible in black-box API settings. As a result, the locus of adaptation shifts from model parameters to agentic components operating around the fixed model. DTL is related to, but clearly distinct from, existing test-time adaptation methods. One line of work focuses on improving performance for a single query through iterative search, reflection, or textual feedback during inference, as exemplified by Reflexion 14 and TextGrad 15 . However, they neither accumulate experience nor generalise improvements across tasks. Another line follows a conventional training–testing paradigm, optimising agentic components on a fixed training set and then deploying a static system without further adaptation, as in DSPy 16 and GEPA 17 . In contrast, DTL explicitly targets long-term policy improvement across a stream of tasks by learning from interaction feedback during deployment. Under these constraints, case-based reasoning (CBR) 9,10,11 provides a natural framework for DTL, where new problems are solved by retrieving relevant past cases, reusing and revising their solutions, and retaining successful new cases to the case bank. Rather than encoding knowledge implicitly in model parameters, CBR externalises experience as an explicit episodic memory that grows over time, enabling adaptation without updating the underlying model. Because adaptation is realised through memory and retrieval, this memory-centric learning mechanism empowers the agent with interpretability, flexibility, and computational efficiency, properties that are particularly well aligned with the constraints of deployment-time learning. Within this framework, CASCADE realises deployment-time learning as a case-based continual adaptation process. For each incoming query, CASCADE first retrieves a past case from an evolving case bank based on the contextual bandit algorithm, and conditions the frozen LLM on both the current query and the retrieved case to generate a solution. The observed reward is then used to update the retrieval policy, while successful interactions are retained as new cases. In this way, the memory progressively expands to cover a broader portion of the query space, and the retrieval policy becomes increasingly effective at selecting useful prior experience. As such, adaptation arises from the cumulative growth of episodic memory and the refinement of experience selection, rather than from updates of LLM parameters. 

# 3 Results 

In this section, we present the empirical results for deployment-time learning in LLM agents, where agents must improve over binary feedback from the online sequence of tasks. We mainly compare CASCADE against three learning mechanisms: (i) non-learning methods, exemplified by Zero-shot prompting method; (ii) memory-based learning methods, including ICRL 18 , ICRLPlus 18 ,and NP-CBR, an ablation variant of CASCADE without adaptive retrieval; (iii) gradient-based learning methods, REINFORCE+LoRA 19,20,21 , which combines on-policy RL with parameter-efficient finetuning. To evaluate the long-term performance, we utilise success rate over deployment steps as the evaluation metric, which directly reflects average regret in the online learning from binary feedback setting. Across a series of single-turn tasks, multi-turn tasks and two complex real-world tasks, CASCADE demonstrates consistent online improvement over deployment steps without updating the parameters of the underlying LLMs. 

> 4CASCADE
> REINFORCE+LoRA
> NP -CBR
> ICRLPlus
> ICRL
> Zero -shot
> Requires multiple
> compute GPUs (e.g., 4x
> NIVIDIA A40 or 2x
> NVIDIA A100)
> Requires only a single
> consumer -grade GPU
> (e.g., NVIDIA GeForce
> RTX 3090)

a

b cFigure 3: Main results on 12 single-turn tasks. All results are obtained using Qwen3-32B and are reported based on five different random seeds. a, Success rate improvement over Zero-shot method during the deployment steps across different tasks. Solid lines represent mean values and the error bars are standard deviations. b, Table displaying the normalised scores (0-1 range) of all the methods across different tasks, with score of 1 indicating the maximum performance per task. 

c, Performance-resource trade-off across different methods. Compared with the gradient-based learning method, deployment-time learning aims to achieve a better balance between resource efficiency and performance. The proposed CASCADE method outperforms REINFORCE+LoRA on 12 single-turn tasks. Moreover, CASCADE can be deployed on a single consumer-grade GPU, whereas REINFORCE+LoRA requires multiple high-end GPUs. 

## 3.1 Results on Single-Turn Tasks 

To evaluate the effectiveness of deployment-time learning in single-turn settings, we consider 12 challenging tasks spanning three representative categories: (i) decision support, including medical diagnosis, medication recommendation, legal charge prediction, penalty legal prediction, and financial query routing; (ii) operational reasoning in artificial intelligence for information technology operations (AIOps); and (iii) code generation for text-to-SQL generation. We provide detailed descriptions of each task in Supplementary Notes. 

Learning process. We first analyse the online policy improvement during deployment by examining how success rates evolve compared to the non-learning baseline Zero-shot. Fig. 3a reports the improvement in success rate over Zero-shot for CASCADE and NP-CBR, the strongest DTL baseline. The results show that NP-CBR consistently improves the performance of Qwen3-32B 

across all benchmarks, which demonstrates the effectiveness of CBR framework for deployment-

5time learning. Building on this, CASCADE further improves upon NP-CBR, increasing the average success rate from 63.76% to 66.68% across all benchmarks. This gain highlights the importance of learning the adaptive retriever policy from the task feedback to achieve an effective trade-off between exploration and exploitation during case retrieval. We further summarise the normalised success rates of all the baselines in Fig. 3b. Among all memory-based learning methods, CASCADE consistently achieves the best performance across all benchmarks. Notably, CASCADE outperforms the gradient-based learning method REIN-FORCE+LoRA on 9 out of 12 tasks and achieves comparable performance on the remaining ones. These results validate the feasibility of achieving continuous policy improvement during deployment without updating the parameters of the underlying LLM. Moreover, CASCADE can be naturally extended to retrieve and reuse multiple cases by adopting the combinatorial neural contextual bandit framework 22 , which selects the top-k cases based on upper confidence bound scores. As shown in Extended Data Fig. E1a, increasing the number of retrieved cases to four enables CASCADE to surpass REINFORCE+LoRA on the remaining three tasks as well. This finding underscores the potential of memory-based learning mechanisms to outperform gradient-based ones through appropriate context engineering. In terms of resource efficiency, Fig. 3c shows that CASCADE achieves the highest average success rate while requiring less than 4 GB of GPU memory, corresponding to a single consumer-grade GPU. No existing method achieves comparable performance under an equal or smaller memory budget, placing CASCADE on the Pareto frontier of success rate and resource efficiency. In contrast, REINFORCE+LoRA requires multiple high-end GPUs during learning process, highlighting the necessity of shifting the learning locus from model parameters to agentic components. 

Generality across different size of LLMs. To examine the generality of CASCADE across backbone LLMs of varying scales, we evaluate all methods on multiple model sizes from the Qwen3 series 23 . Specifically, we conduct experiments on the 4B, 8B, 14B, and 32B variants, where the 4B model is suited for edge-device deployment and the 32B model targets industrial scenarios. We present the results of Zero-shot, NP-CBR, REINFORCE+LoRA, and CASCADE in Fig. 4b. Overall, CASCADE consistently achieves the best performance in most settings, demonstrating strong generality and robustness for deployment-time learning. A notable exception occurs in the challenging medication recommendation task (MIMIC-IV-MR) with Qwen3-4B , where all methods fail. This observation suggests that effective deployment-time learning relies on a minimum level of foundational capability in the backbone LLM. When a zero-shot prompted LLM fails to obtain any successful interactions with the environment, online policy improvement becomes difficult to guarantee. Importantly, the lower-bound performance of CASCADE surpasses the upper-bound performance of zero-shot baselines in 9 out of 12 tasks. This result indicates that CASCADE equipped with small-scale LLMs can outperform larger-scale models, underscoring the importance of introducing deployment-time learning as a third stage in the LLM lifecycle. 

Applicability to black-box LLMs. Beyond open-sourced LLMs, the memory-based learning mechanism also enables CASCADE to extend to LLMs accessed solely through black-box APIs. To validate this applicability, we utilise the commercial black-box LLM gemini-2.0-flash and compare CASCADE with both Zero-shot and the strongest DTL baseline NP-CBR across nine tasks, as shown in Fig. 3c. We exclude MIMIC-IV-MR, MIMIC-IV-MSR, and MIMIC-IV-TLP from this evaluation due to dataset licensing restrictions. Experimental results demonstrate that both NP-CBR and CASCADE consistently yield online policy improvements over the Zero-shot baseline across  

> 6a
> b
> cd

Figure 4: In-depth analyses on 12 single-turn tasks. All results are reported based on five different random seeds. a, Performance comparison with Qwen3 models of varying sizes as the underlying LLM. Dotted lines are used to highlight the upper bound of Zero-shot and the lower bound of CASCADE. b, Performance of three non-parametric methods with the black-box LLM 

gemini-2.0-flash . c,d , Radar plot of overall performance comparing CASCADE with three ablation variants ( c); heatmap of CASCADE’s relative improvement over the best non-parametric baseline NP-CBR across varying values of the exploration coefficient α, where higher α indicates stronger exploration ( d). The results are obtained using Qwen3-32B .

> 7

all evaluated datasets. Moreover, CASCADE further benefits from its adaptive retriever policy, achieving an average relative improvement of 3% over NP-CBR. In contrast, gradient-based learning methods such as REINFORCE+LoRA are not applicable in the black-box setting, as they require gradient backpropagation through model parameters. 

Ablation study and hyper-parameter analysis. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed neural contextual bandit algorithm, we conduct ablation studies and replace it with several state-of-the-art bandit baselines, including LinLogUCB 24 , NeuralLogUCB 25 , and NeuralLinUCB 26 . The success rates of all ablation variants are summarised in Fig. 4c. The results show that the performance of different contextual bandit algorithms varies substantially across tasks, suggesting that different tasks may favour different assumptions about the underlying reward model. In contrast, the proposed Neural-LinLogUCB consistently achieves the highest or at least comparable success rates across all tasks. This demonstrates that modelling CBR as a contextual bandit problem with binary feedback, while decoupling representation learning and uncertainty estimation, provides an effective solution to regret minimisation in case retrieval. We further analyse the impact of the exploration coefficient α on CASCADE’s performance. This coefficient controls the exploration strength, with larger values encouraging CASCADE to retrieve and reuse more novel cases. Fig. 4d reports the relative performance gains of CASCADE over the strongest non-parametric baseline, NP-CBR, as α varies from 0.1 to 1.0. Across this range, CASCADE consistently achieves positive improvements over NP-CBR in most settings, indicating strong robustness to the choice of α. Notably, different tasks exhibit distinct optimal values of α.Consequently, we recommend performing lightweight hyper-parameter tuning before deployment; alternatively, setting α to a small default value (e.g., 0.1) provides a reliable and effective choice. 

## 3.2 Results on Multi-Turn Tasks 

Beyond single-turn tasks, CASCADE naturally extends to multi-turn settings through trajectory-level case-based reasoning (Fig. 5a). In this subsection, we first evaluate CASCADE on two challenging embodied sequential decision-making benchmarks, ALFWorld 27 and ScienceWorld 28 . We then present detailed case studies demonstrating the effectiveness of CASCADE in two complex real-world application scenarios: web-based deep search and tabular reasoning on electronic health records (EHR). We primarily compare CASCADE against two baselines, Zero-shot and NP-CBR, and exclude REINFORCE+LoRA from our evaluation due to its prohibitively high computational cost in multi-turn settings. Unless otherwise specified, all results are obtained using Qwen3-32B .

Embodied sequential decision-making. To evaluate the effectiveness of CASCADE in multi-turn tasks, we conduct experiments on two challenging simulated sequential decision-making environments, ALFWorld and ScienceWorld (Fig. 5b). ALFWorld 27 is a popular decision-making benchmark where agents must navigate environments and interact with objects using natural language instructions to complete household tasks. In contrast, ScienceWorld 28 is a more challenging text-based embodied benchmark, featuring a larger action space tailored to conducting elementary-level scientific experiments. Fig. 5c illustrates the success rate improvement over the Zero-shot method for both CASCADE and NP-CBR across deployment steps in the two environments. The results demonstrate that both methods consistently improve performance over the Zero-shot method during deployment. Notably, CASCADE further enhances the performance of NP-CBR, increasing success rates in ALFWorld from 62.01% to 67.43% and in ScienceWorld from 59.36% to 66.84%. We further      

> 8Retriever LLM
> agent
> Q
> Case bank
> I. Retrieve II. Reuse & Revise
> III. Retain
> Trajectory -level case
> CASCADE for multi -turn tasks
> state
> action
> {state 1,action 1, state 2, action 2, …, state T,action T}

a AlfWorld ScienceWorld b                  

> Environment ALFWorld ScienceWorld
> Agent framework Act ReAct Act ReAct
> Zero -shot 39.69 ±0.47 62.35 ±0.46 30.71 ±0.16 55.55 ±0.55
> NP -CBR 62.01 ±0.51 80.76 ±0.37 59.36 ±2.11 71.52 ±1.81
> CASCADE (Ours) 67.43 ±1.25 81.74 ±0.60 66.84 ±1.70 74.67 ±3.04

c

e

d

f gFigure 5: Results on embodied sequential decision-making tasks. All the results are obtained using Qwen3-32B and reported based on five different random seeds. a, CASCADE for multi-turn tasks, which retrieves, reuses, revises, and retains trajectory-level cases during learning. b, The visualisation of two embodied sequential decision-making tasks, ALFWorld and ScienceWorld. Both are taken from existing works 27,28 . c, Success rate improvement over Zero-shot method during the deployment steps. Solid lines represent mean values and the error bars are standard deviations. 

d,e , Topic-wise performance by task type is presented for ScienceWorld ( d) and ALFWorld ( e). f,Success rates across different task distributions in ALFWorld. The data are represented as median values (the central line of each box), 25th and 75th percentiles (the bottom and top edges of each box), minima and maxima (the whiskers attached to each box), and outliers (outside the box and whiskers). g, Performance comparison among three methods under two different agent frameworks. 

9analyse topic-wise performance by task type in ALFWorld (Fig. 5e) and ScienceWorld (Fig. 5d). In ALFWorld, CASCADE consistently achieves the best results across all task categories, delivering improvements ranging from 0.7% to 10.0% over NP-CBR. In ScienceWorld, tasks such as find-animal , find-living-thing , and find-non-living-thing are particularly challenging for backbone LLMs with Zero-shot prompting method, which achieve near-zero success rates. In contrast, both NP-CBR and CASCADE substantially improve performance, with gains exceeding 20%, 40%, and 80%, respectively. These results highlight the importance of deployment-time learning, enabling LLM agents to achieve continuous policy improvement during deployment. Since ALFWorld additionally provides 134 unseen tasks that differ from the training set, we append these tasks to the end of the online task sequence to further investigate the impact of task distribution shift on CASCADE. As shown in Fig. 5f, CASCADE attains success rates nearly twice those of the Zero-shot method on unseen tasks, demonstrating its ability to rapidly adapt to novel tasks via the memory-based learning mechanism. Moreover, CASCADE consistently outperforms all other methods across both seen and unseen task distributions, highlighting its strong generalisation capability in both in-distribution and out-of-distribution settings. In practical settings, more advanced agent frameworks can be leveraged to empower LLMs with complex planning and action capabilities. We demonstrate that CASCADE can function as a plug-in component for such frameworks, owing to its simple yet effective memory-based learning mechanism. Specifically, we integrate CASCADE into the ReAct framework 29 , which autonomously performs reasoning before taking actions, and evaluate its effectiveness. The overall success rates are summarised in Fig. 5g. ReAct equipped with CASCADE achieves success rates of 81.74% and 74.67% on the two tasks, outperforming the strongest baseline by 0.98% and 3.15%, respectively. In contrast, ReAct with Zero-shot performs substantially worse, exhibiting an approximately 20% performance gap compared to CASCADE. These results highlight the strong potential of CASCADE to further enhance existing LLM agent frameworks. 

Case study of web-based deep search. Deep search 30,31 is a critical capability for modern web-based question answering because it empowers LLMs to retrieve relevant information from external sources, such as knowledge bases and the open web, apply multi-step reasoning, and synthesise accurate, well-grounded answers to complex user queries. Despite recent progress, LLMs still face significant challenges in this multi-turn tool-calling setting, where they must decide when to retrieve information, how to formulate retrieval queries, and how to reason over the retrieved evidence to derive reliable answers. In this subsection, we present a case study demonstrating how LLM agents can be integrated with CASCADE to enable deployment-time learning for web-based deep search tasks (Fig. 6a). Specifically, we conduct the experiments with two types of tools: (i) Local retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), where we deploy a search engine with 2018 Wikipedia dump 32 as the knowledge base and E5 33 as the retriever model; (ii) Web search, where we leverage the Serper API to perform real-time queries on Google. Both tools are implemented based on the model context protocol (MCP). We use the 2Wiki dataset 34 to benchmark web-based deep search, which requires multi-hop knowledge-intensive reasoning over the queries. We use Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 as the backbone LLM due to its advanced tool-calling capabilities. In 2Wiki, directly answering questions without tool calls achieves a success rate of 20.29%. Enabling tool calls in a zero-shot setting improves performance to 35.36% with local RAG and further to 50.63% with web search. As shown in Fig. 6b, deployment-time learning consistently derives policy         

> 10 What is the maximum
> total hospital cost that
> involves a diagnosis
> named comp -oth vasc
> dev/graft since 1 year ago?
> QA
> Answer
> LLM
> def LoadDB (DBNAME):
> # Load the database DBNAME and returns the database…
> def FilterDB (DATABASE, CONDITIONS):
> # Filter the DATABASE according to the CONDITIONS…
> def Calendar (DURATION):
> # Return the date after the DURATION of time…
> …
> Tools
> (API)
> Debug
> EHR
> agent
> Query

a

b

d

c

e f g     

> What is the award
> that the director of
> film Bangalore
> Naatkal earned?
> LLM Q
> Tool call
> A local Wikipedia search
> tool over a locally
> indexed database
> A
> Deep search agent
> Local RAG Web search
> A real -time web search
> tool using the Serper
> API to query Google
> Model context protocol
> Tool result Answer Query

Figure 6: Results on two real-world tasks: web-based deep search and complex tabular reasoning over electronic health records (EHR). All results are reported based on five different random seeds, and all error bars represent standard deviations. a, Web-based deep search tasks that require multiple rounds of tool calling. We employ the model context protocol to provide two types of tools: local retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and real-time web search. b, Success rate improvement over Zero-shot method during the deployment steps on 2Wiki under both tool types. c,Average increase in tool calls over Zero-shot method duering the deployment steps on 2Wiki under both tool types. d, Complex tabular reasoning tasks that require using appropriate APIs to query the EHR database. Real-time execution results are returned to the LLM when debugging is required. 

e, Success rate improvement over Zero-shot method during the deployment steps on MIMIC-III. f,Success rate across different difficulties on MIMIC-III. g, Average decrease in debugging rounds during the deployment step on MIMIC-III. 

11 improvement over the Zero-shot method, while CASCADE further improves NP-CBR from 45.94% to 50.06% in local RAG, and from 53.29% to 66.51% in web search. Moreover, Fig. 6c shows that deployment-time learning increases the number of tool calls per query, resulting in the retrieval of more evidence relevant to the target question, which may contribute to improved performance. 

Case study of complex tabular reasoning on EHR. Electronic health record (EHR) is a digital version of a patient’s comprehensive medical history, created and maintained by healthcare providers to document and monitor the patient’s health status over time 35,36,37 . In routine clinical practice, clinicians typically rely on rule-based systems or support from data engineers to access and retrieve patient data from EHRs. This workflow often leads to inefficiencies and delays, which can negatively impact the quality and timeliness of patient care. In this case study, we investigate LLM agents for complex tabular reasoning on EHRs and their integration with CASCADE to enable deployment-time learning. Following EHRAgent 36 , we integrate multiple external tools and expose them to LLMs through API functions. Then, LLM agents generate code scripts to interact with EHR databases and iteratively refine their solutions based on real-time execution feedback, framing the task as a multi-turn code generation problem (Fig. 6d). We use the MIMIC-III dataset 38,39 to benchmark complex tabular reasoning on EHR. The dataset comprises real-world clinical data collected from patients at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center between 2001 and 2012. In MIMIC-III, LLM agents that interact with the EHR database in a zero-shot setting achieve only a 20.75% success rate, mainly due to difficulties in accurately invoking API functions within the allowed number of debugging iterations. In contrast, NP-CBR and CASCADE substantially improve success rates through deployment-time learning, reaching 44.02% and 55.76%, respectively (Fig. 6e). Notably, NP-CBR represents the state-of-the-art solution for EHR agents 36 . Fig. 6f summarises success rates across varying task difficulties, where CASCADE consistently outperforms all baselines. Furthermore, Fig. 6g shows that deployment-time learning reduces the number of debugging rounds per query, indicating that LLM agents progressively improve their ability to correctly invoke API functions during deployment. 

# 4 Discussion 

This work challenges the conventional view that deployment marks the end of learning in the lifecycle of LLMs. We instead argue that deployment should be regarded as a distinct and essential learning stage, where LLM agents can continue to improve through interaction with the environment and feedback. This perspective is motivated by a growing gap between how LLMs are trained, offline on static corpora, and how they are increasingly used, as autonomous agents operating in dynamic open-ended settings. Within this reframing, we introduce deployment-time learning as a general paradigm for enabling adaptation after deployment, and demonstrate its feasibility through CASCADE, a principled framework that achieves no-regret online improvement without updating model parameters. A central insight of this work is that effective learning in deployed LLM systems does not require modifying the foundation model itself. Instead, learning can be realised by shifting the locus of adaptation to agentic components that shape behaviour, such as prompt, memory, and retrieval. This design choice is not merely a practical compromise, but a principled response to the constraints of real-world deployment, where gradient access is often unavailable, computational budgets are limited, and models are accessed as black-box APIs. Our results across single-turn tasks, multi-turn 

> 12

decision-making environments, and real-world case studies demonstrate that such parameter-free learning is sufficient to drive continuous policy improvement. There are several limitations that motivate future work to further realise the potential of case-based deployment-time learning. First, while CASCADE performs robustly across a wide range of tasks, its behaviour over substantially longer horizons remains to be explored, which may involve memory growth, case management, and forgetting mechanism. Second, the current framework primarily learns from successful experiences, discarding failed attempts that may contain informative signals. Given the self-reflective capabilities of modern LLMs 14,40 , developing principled methods for learning from failure is a promising direction for enhancing deployment-time learning. Finally, as with other experiential learning methods, deployment-time learning requires a minimum level of foundational capability in the underlying LLM; when its zero-shot performance is near zero, learning from experience becomes substantially more challenging. More broadly, as AI systems transition from static predictors to autonomous agents operating in open-ended environments, experience becomes a central driver of continual improvement. Realising experiential learning at scale requires methods that are computationally efficient and compatible with the practical constraints of deployment. By modelling case-based reasoning as a contextual bandit problem, CASCADE illustrates how these requirements can be met without updating model parameters. We believe deployment-time learning represents a complementary axis for progress in artificial intelligence, orthogonal to scale, data, and architecture, by transforming deployment from an endpoint into a continual source of learning. 

# 5 Methods 

## 5.1 Problem Formulation 

We formalise deployment-time learning as an online learning problem with bandit feedback, where LLM agents interact with the environment over a deployment horizon of T timesteps. In each timestep t ∈ [T ], the agent observes a query qt ∈ Q , and then generates a solution at ∈ A . Here, both the query and the solution are in the natural language form, represented as a sequence of tokens from a pre-defined vocabulary V. Finally, it receives a binary reward rt = R(qt, a t) from the environment, indicating whether the generated solution is successful. The objective of the agent is to maximise its expected accumulated rewards over these T timesteps, which is equivalent to the minimisation of the pseudo regret (or regret for short) as: 

RT = E

" TX

> t=1

[R (qt, a ⋆t ) − R (qt, a t)] 

#

, (1) where a⋆t = arg max a∈A R(qt, a ) refers to the optimal solution in the solution space. A good deployment-time learning agent should have sub-linear regret, and can thus achieve no-regret learning , i.e., lim T →∞ RT /T = 0 . This implies that the agent’s average performance asymptotically approaches that of an oracle that always generates the optimal solution. 

## 5.2 CASCADE: Case-Based Deployment-Time Learning 

To instantiate deployment-time learning in LLM agents, we seek a learning mechanism that enables continual adaptation from experience without modifying the underlying LLM. A key inspiration 

> 13

comes from human cognition: rather than relying solely on synaptic plasticity, the brain exhibits powerful learning through episodic memory, where past problem–solution experiences are explicitly stored and reused to guide future decisions. This conceptually aligns with the principles of case-based reasoning (CBR) 9,10,11 , a classic problem-solving paradigm that solves new problems by retrieving and reusing past successful solutions. Built on top of CBR, at the core of CASCADE is an episodic memory (or case bank) Mt, where each case c is defined as a tuple (q, a, r ). In each timestep, given a new query qt, CASCADE first retrieves a case ct from the case bank via a retriever model μ, i.e., 

ct ∼ μ(·| qt, Mt), where μ can be either stochastic or deterministic. Then, it reuses and revises the retrieved case to derive the solution for the current query with the LLM, i.e., at ∼ pLLM (·| qt, c t).The environment returns a binary reward rt. If the generated solution is effective (i.e., rt = 1 ), CASCADE retains the new case (qt, a t, r t) in the case bank, i.e., Mt+1 = Mt ∪ { (qt, a t, r t)};otherwise, the case bank remains unchanged, i.e., Mt+1 = Mt. This Retrieve-Reuse-Revise-Retain process follows the principle of the classic 4R cycle 11,41,42 in CBR. As such, CASCADE can be formulated as a composite policy: 

πCASCADE (at|qt, Mt) = X

> ct∈M t

μ(ct|qt, Mt)pLLM (at|qt, c t). (2) This formulation enables us to decouple the decision-making process between case retrieval and LLM generation. By fixing the parameters of the LLM, we treat its stationary response behaviour as part of the environment dynamics. Therefore, CASCADE can be optimised by merely learning the lightweight retriever policy without finetuning the LLM, and the optimisation objective is to maximise the expected utility of the retrieved case c for a given problem q, i.e., 

¯R(q, c ) = Ea∼pLLM (·| q,c )[R(q, a )] . (3) Then, we can decompose the regret of CASCADE, based on the definition in Eq. (1), into two components: 

RT = E



> T

X

> t=1

R (qt, a ⋆t ) − ¯R (qt, c ⋆t )

| {z } 

> coverage gap ∆t

+ ¯R (qt, c ⋆t ) − ¯R (qt, c t)

| {z } 

> retrieval regret ρt

 , (4) where c⋆t = arg max c∈M t ¯R(qt, c ) denotes the optimal case that achieves the highest expected utility at timestep t. The coverage gap ∆t reflects the inherent limitation of the case bank, capturing the loss due to the absence of a perfectly matching case. In contrast, the retrieval regret ρt quantifies the error introduced by the retriever μ, arising when it fails to select the most useful case available in 

Mt. While the continuously growing case bank of CASCADE can eventually close the coverage gap, it still suffers from retrieval regret, as it fails to fully leverage feedback to adapt and improve the retriever policy. As the case bank grows over time, efficient and accurate retrieval becomes critical. To address this, we adopt a two-stage retrieval pipeline widely used in large-scale information retrieval systems. In the first stage, a pretrained embedding model is utilised to recall a small set of relevant candidate cases from the full case bank. Then, a cross-encoder based reranker scores these candidates to select the best case for reuse. In our design, the embedding model is kept fixed to ensure the semantic similarity during recall, while the reranker is trained online to maximise the expected utility for the final retrieval decision. 

> 14

To enable adaptive retriever learning from binary feedback, we further model the retrieval process as a contextual bandit problem, where retrieving a case is analogous to pulling an arm. At each timestep t ∈ [T ], the retriever observes a context (i.e., the query) qt ∈ Q , and recalls K cases from the case bank to form the candidate pool Ct ⊆ M t. For each candidate case c ∈ C t, we construct the contextual information as the concatenation of the query and the case, denoted by xt,c = [ qt; c].Then, the retriever policy adaptively selects one case ct ∈ C t based on this contextual information. After selection, the agent receives a stochastic binary feedback rt ∈ { 0, 1}, which is exactly the reward of the sampled solution by prompting the LLM with the selected case. We assume that the binary feedback follows a Bernoulli distribution, where the probability of rt = 1 for contextual information xt,c t is modelled as: 

P{rt = 1 | xt,c t } = ¯R(qt, c t) = σ (h (xt,c t )) , (5) where h : V⋆ → R is an unknown latent reward function, and σ : R → [0 , 1] is the sigmoid function, i.e., σ(x) = 1 /(1 + e−x). The goal of the retriever policy is thus to maximise the expected utility of the selected case, or equivalently, minimise the retrieval regret. While standard logistic contextual bandit algorithms 24,25,43 can be applied here, they rely on a fixed feature extraction model, which typically struggles to capture the complex interaction between query pairs. To this end, we follow previous works 44,45,26 to decouple representation learning and uncertainty estimation, and propose the Neural Linear Logistic Upper Confidence Bound (Neural-LinLogUCB) algorithm. In particular, we model the latent reward function with a deep Transformer-based encoder model 46,47 f (·; ω) : V⋆ → Rd and a shallow linear head θ ∈ Rd, i.e., 

h(xt,c ) = ⟨θ⋆, f (xt,c ; ω⋆)⟩, (6) where θ⋆ and ω⋆ denote the unknown parameters for linear head and encoder model, respectively. Now, we describe the learning algorithm of Neural-LinLogUCB. In timestep t, the retriever policy observes a set of contextual information Xt = {xt,c 1 , ..., x t,c K }. Then, it selects the case that maximises the following upper confidence bound: 

ct = arg max 

> c∈C t

n

⟨θt−1, f (xt,c ; ωt−1)⟩ + α∥f (xt,c ; ωt−1)∥A−1

> t−1

o

, (7) where α is a hyper-parameter that controls the exploration, and the matrix At is defined as 

At = λI +

> t

X

> s=1

f (xs,c s ; ωt)f (xs,c s ; ωt)⊤, (8) where λ denotes the hyper-parameter of the regularisation strength in linear head estimation. After selecting the case, the retriever policy will receive a stochastic binary reward rt, which is then utilised to update the parameters for deep encoder model and the linear head. At timestep t, a natural way for the estimation of linear head based on history data {(xs,c s , r s)}ts=1 

derives from the maximum-likelihood principle. This is equivalent to finding the optimal parameter 

θt+1 by solving the following logistic regression problem with L2 regularisation: 

min 

> θ∈Rd
> t

X

> s=1

−rs log σ  θ⊤f (xs,c s ; ωt) − (1 − rs) log  1 − σ  θ⊤f (xs,c s ; ωt) + λ

2 ∥θ∥22. (9) 

15 Considering the linearly increasing number of samples in each timestep, we perform single-step gradient descent in practice to estimate the linear head with the following update rule: 

θt+1 ← θt − η   σ  θ⊤ 

> t

f (xt,c t ; ωt) − rt

 f (xt,c t ; ωt) + λθt

 , (10) where η denotes the learning rate. For the deep encoder network, we update its parameters once every H timesteps to reduce com-putational overhead. At epoch m (corresponding to timestep t = mH ), we utilise the collected data during the current epoch, i.e., {(xs,c s , r s)}mH s=( m−1) H+1 , to perform batch gradient descent. The update is initiated from the parameters at the previous epoch, (ωm−1, θm−1), by minimising the following loss function: 

Lm(ω) = 1

H

> mH

X

> s=( m−1) H+1

−rs log σ  θ⊤

> m−1

f (xs,c s ; ω) − (1 − rs) log  1 − σ  θ⊤

> m−1

f (xs,c s ; ω) .

(11) As such, we can achieve principled deployment-time learning without performing back-propagation on the large amount of parameters of LLMs. Instead, we only need to learn a lightweight deep encoder model and a linear head to fully exploit the binary feedback for the minimisation of the retrieval regret ρ, thereby achieving no-regret learning. We summarise the pseudo-code of CASCADE in Algorithm 1. 

## 5.3 No-Regret Learning 

This section analyses the regret of the proposed CASCADE algorithm. Overall, we follow Eq. (4) to decompose the overall regret into coverage gap and retrieval regret and bound them individually: (i) a non-parametric coverage gap that vanishes as the case bank grows, and (ii) a bandit-style retrieval regret controlled by Neural-LinLogUCB. This yields an overall sub-linear regret guarantee, establishing no-regret deployment-time learning without updating the parameters of the underlying LLM. Since the complete analysis is technically involved, we defer the full technical analysis to the Supplementary Notes for interested readers and present only the final result as below. We first present the regret analysis for the coverage gap R∆ 

> T

= E[PTt=1 ∆t], which captures the limitation of the case bank: even with an optimal retriever, performance is constrained if no relevant past case exists. Intuitively, this gap decreases as the agent accumulates successful experiences during deployment, enabling the case bank to increasingly cover the query space. Under mild regularity conditions, namely that (i) similar queries share similar solutions, (ii) the backbone LLM maintains a non-zero probability of success, and (iii) similar queries recur with sufficient frequency, the case bank progressively covers the query space. As a result, the accumulated coverage gap grows sub-linearly with deployment time. The full derivation is presented in Supplementary Note D. 

Theorem 1 (Informal) . Under the above assumptions, with high probability, the accumulated coverage gap satisfies 

R∆ 

> T

=

( ˜O



T d0−1

> d0



, d0 > 1,

˜O(1) , 0 < d 0 ≤ 1,

where d0 denotes the intrinsic dimension of the query distribution. 

> 16

Algorithm 1 Case-based deployment-time learning framework.  

> 1:

Input: Number of rounds T , regularisation parameter λ, exploration coefficient α, update interval of deep encoder H, learning rate η, pretrained embedding model E, LLM pLLM . 

> 2:

Initialisation: Initialise the parameters of encoder network ω0 and the linear head θ0 from the pretrained reranker model; initialise the case bank M1 = ∅. 

> 3:

for t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 4:

Observe the problem qt from the environment  

> 5:

Recall top-K cases from the case bank to form the candidate pool Ct =arg top Kc∈M t ⟨E(qt), E(c)⟩ 

> 6:

for each case c ∈ C t do  

> 7:

Compute the exploitation term: ˆr(qt, c ) = ⟨θt−1, f ([ qt, c ]; ωt−1)⟩ 

> 8:

Compute the exploration term: U(qt, c ) = ∥f ([ qt, c ]; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1
> 9:

Compute the UCB score: UCB (qt, c ) = ˆ r(qt, c ) + αU(qt, c ) 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Select the retrieved case ct = arg max c∈C t UCB (qt, c ). 

> 12:

Sample the solution at ∼ pLLM (·| qt, c t) 

> 13:

Observe the reward rt = R(qt, a t) 

> 14:

if t%H = 0 then  

> 15:

Update the deep encoder following Eq. (11): ωt ← ωt−1 − η∇ωLm(ω) 

> 16:

Load the linear head θt from the trained encoder model  

> 17:

else  

> 18:

Fix the deep encoder: ωt ← ωt−1 

> 19:

Update the linear head θt via Eq. (10)  

> 20:

end if  

> 21:

if rt = 1 then  

> 22:

Retain the new case into the case bank, i.e., Mt+1 = Mt ∪ { (qt, a t, r t)} 

> 23:

else  

> 24:

Keep the case bank unchanged, i.e., Mt+1 = Mt 

> 25:

end if  

> 26:

end for 

17 For the retrieval regret bound RρT = E[PTt=1 ρt], we adopt the standard assumptions used in prior neural contextual bandit analyses 48,26,25,43 . The full derivation is presented in Supplementary Note E. 

Theorem 2 (Informal) . Under standard assumptions for neural contextual bandits, for a sufficiently wide encoder network, with high probability, the retrieval regret of CASCADE satisfies 

RρT = ˜O( 1

κσ

B√T ),

where B measures the approximation error between the true latent reward and the learned latent reward, and κσ is the strong monotonicity constant of the sigmoid function. 

Combining the bounds on coverage gap and retrieval regret, we obtain a sub-linear bound on the total regret of CASCADE. Consequently, CASCADE achieves no-regret learning during deployment, despite the backbone LLM remaining frozen. 

Theorem 3 (Informal) . Under the above assumptions, with high probability, the overall regret of CASCADE satisfies 

RT =



˜O



max 



T d0−1 

> d0

, Bκσ

√T

 

, d0 > 1,

˜O

 Bκσ

√T



, 0 < d 0 ≤ 1.

Data availability. We organise all the processed dataset in this paper as a new benchmark named DTLBench, and we open-source a portion of it under a mixed open-source license at https: //huggingface.co/datasets/guosy/DTLBench . The remaining portion involving MIMIC-IV falls under the PhysioNet Credentialed Health Data License 1.5.0. In accordance with PhysioNet policy, dataset projects may only be considered after publication; therefore, this component will be open-sourced following publication. 

Code availability. Source code for CASCADE is available under an open-source license at https: //github.com/guosyjlu/CASCADE .

Acknowledgement. This work is supported by National Key R&D Program of China under Grant No. 2023YFF0905400 (Yi Chang), National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 624B2059 (Siyuan Guo), U2341229 (Yi Chang), 62476110 (Hechang Chen), Key R&D Project of Jilin Province under Grant No. 20240304200SF (Hechang Chen), China Scholarship Council under Grant No. 202406170133 (Siyuan Guo), the New Cornerstone Science Foundation through the XPLORER PRIZE (Yi Chang). 

> 18

# References 

1. Alexander Novikov, Ngân V ˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco JR Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, et al. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131 .2. Haitham Bou-Ammar, Antoine Grosnit, Alexandre Maraval, Refinath SN, Zichao Zhao, James Doran, Giuseppe Paolo, Albert Thomas, Jonas Gonzalez, Abhineet Kumar, et al. Kolb-based experiential learning for generalist agents with human-level kaggle data science performance, 2025. URL https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7472642/v1 .3. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638, 2025. 4. Anthony Holtmaat and Karel Svoboda. Experience-dependent structural synaptic plasticity in the mammalian brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 10(9):647–658, 2009. 5. Georg B Keller and Thomas D Mrsic-Flogel. Predictive processing: a canonical cortical computation. Neuron , 100(2):424–435, 2018. 6. Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6):186345, 2024. 7. Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Reinforcement learning: An introduction , volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998. 8. David Silver and Richard S. Sutton. Welcome to the era of experience, 2025. URL https: //storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/Era-of-Experience%20/The%20Era%2 0of%20Experience%20Paper.pdf .9. Janet L Kolodner. An introduction to case-based reasoning. Artificial intelligence review , 6(1): 3–34, 1992. 10. Ian Watson and Farhi Marir. Case-based reasoning: A review. The knowledge engineering review , 9(4):327–354, 1994. 11. Agnar Aamodt and Enric Plaza. Case-based reasoning: Foundational issues, methodological variations, and system approaches. AI communications , 7(1):39–59, 1994. 12. Rémi Munos et al. From bandits to monte-carlo tree search: The optimistic principle applied to optimization and planning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning , 7(1):1–129, 2014. 13. Guibin Zhang, Hejia Geng, Xiaohang Yu, Zhenfei Yin, Zaibin Zhang, Zelin Tan, Heng Zhou, Zhongzhi Li, Xiangyuan Xue, Yijiang Li, Yifan Zhou, Yang Chen, Chen Zhang, Yutao Fan, Zihu Wang, Songtao Huang, Francisco Piedrahita-Velez, Yue Liao, Hongru Wang, Mengyue Yang, Heng Ji, Jun Wang, Shuicheng Yan, Philip Torr, and Lei Bai. The landscape of agentic reinforcement learning for llms: A survey, 2025. 14. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 8634–8652, 2023. 

> 19

15. Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Pan Lu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. Optimizing generative ai by backpropagating language model feedback. Nature , 639(8055):609–616, 2025. 16. Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan A, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into state-of-the-art pipelines. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. 17. Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alex Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. GEPA: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. 18. Giovanni Monea, Antoine Bosselut, Kianté Brantley, and Yoav Artzi. Llms are in-context bandit reinforcement learners. In Second Conference on Language Modeling , 2025. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=c0RsezY2D1 .19. Jacob Jackson, Phillip Kravtsov, and Shomil Jain. Improving cursor tab with online rl, sep 2025. URL https://cursor.com/blog/tab-rl . Accessed: 2025-10-30. 20. Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?i d=nZeVKeeFYf9 .21. John Schulman and Thinking Machines Lab. Lora without regret. Thinking Machines Lab: Connectionism , 2025. doi: 10.64434/tml.20250929. https://thinkingmachines.ai/blog/lora/. 22. Taehyun Hwang, Kyuwook Chai, and Min-hwan Oh. Combinatorial neural bandits. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 14203–14236. PMLR, 2023. 23. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. 24. Lihong Li, Yu Lu, and Dengyong Zhou. Provably optimal algorithms for generalized linear contextual bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2071–2080. PMLR, 2017. 25. Arun Verma, Zhongxiang Dai, Xiaoqiang Lin, Patrick Jaillet, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Neural dueling bandits: Preference-based optimization with human feedback. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 26. Pan Xu, Zheng Wen, Handong Zhao, and Quanquan Gu. Neural contextual bandits with deep representation and shallow exploration. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. 27. Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=0IOX0YcCdTn .

> 20

28. Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Scienceworld: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11279–11298, 2022. 29. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?i d=WE_vluYUL-X .30. Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan O Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei Han. Search-r1: Training LLMs to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. In Second Conference on Language Modeling , 2025. 31. Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyumanshan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu. DeepResearcher: Scaling deep research via reinforcement learning in real-world environments. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 414–431, 2025. 32. Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In 

Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6769–6781, 2020. 33. Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03533 , 2022. 34. Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. Constructing a multi-hop QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 6609–6625, 2020. 35. Duane Bender and Kamran Sartipi. Hl7 fhir: An agile and restful approach to healthcare information exchange. In Proceedings of the 26th IEEE international symposium on computer-based medical systems , pages 326–331. IEEE, 2013. 36. Wenqi Shi, Ran Xu, Yuchen Zhuang, Yue Yu, Jieyu Zhang, Hang Wu, Yuanda Zhu, Joyce C Ho, Carl Yang, and May Dongmei Wang. Ehragent: Code empowers large language models for few-shot complex tabular reasoning on electronic health records. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 22315–22339, 2024. 37. Yusheng Liao, Chaoyi Wu, Junwei Liu, Shuyang Jiang, Pengcheng Qiu, Haowen Wang, Yun Yue, Shuai Zhen, Jian Wang, Qianrui Fan, et al. Ehr-r1: A reasoning-enhanced foundational language model for electronic health record analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.25628 , 2025. 38. Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data , 3(1):1–9, 2016. 39. Gyubok Lee, Hyeonji Hwang, Seongsu Bae, Yeonsu Kwon, Woncheol Shin, Seongjun Yang, Minjoon Seo, Jong-Yeup Kim, and Edward Choi. Ehrsql: A practical text-to-sql benchmark for electronic health records. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:15589–15601, 2022. 40. Jun Wang. Memento-ii: Learning by stateful reflective memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22716 , 2025. 

> 21

41. Siyuan Guo, Huiwu Liu, Xiaolong Chen, Yuming Xie, Liang Zhang, Tao Han, Hechang Chen, Yi Chang, and Jun Wang. Optimizing case-based reasoning system for functional test script generation with large language models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 2 , pages 4487–4498, 2025. 42. Ramon Lopez De Mantaras, David Mcsherry, Derek Bridge, David Leake, Barry Smyth, Susan Craw, Boi Faltings, Mary Lou Maher, Michael T Cox, Kenneth Forbus, et al. Retrieval, reuse, revision and retention in case-based reasoning. Knowledge Engineering Review , 20(3):215–240, 2005. 43. Seoungbin Bae and Dabeen Lee. Neural logistic bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02069 ,2025. 44. Carlos Riquelme, George Tucker, and Jasper Snoek. Deep bayesian bandits showdown: An empirical comparison of bayesian deep networks for thompson sampling. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. 45. Tom Zahavy and Shie Mannor. Deep neural linear bandits: Overcoming catastrophic forgetting through likelihood matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08612 , 2019. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/1901.08612 .46. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 47. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers) , pages 4171–4186, 2019. 48. Dongruo Zhou, Lihong Li, and Quanquan Gu. Neural contextual bandits with ucb-based exploration. In International conference on machine learning , pages 11492–11502. PMLR, 2020.  

> 22 a
> bc

Figure E1: Results on the extension of CASCADE to multiple cases. All results are reported based on five different random seeds. a, Performance comparison under different number of cases with Qwen3-32B as the backbone LLM across 12 single-turn tasks. The centre represents the mean value and the error bar represents the standard deviation. In general, larger number of retrieved cases predictably increase the performance of CASCADE. b, CASCADE performance across model sizes and numbers of retrieved cases. Circle colour intensity and size reflect success rate, with darker and larger circles indicating better performance. c, Heatmap of CASCADE’s absolute improvement over the best non-parametric baseline NP-CBR, across different LLM model sizes and numbers of cases in the context. 

> 23

# Contents of Supplementary Notes 

A Comparison with Existing Works 25 B Benchmark Details 27 

B.1 Medical Diagnosis: DDXPlus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 B.2 Medication Recommendation: MIMIC-IV-MR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 B.3 Medical Specialty Referral: MIMIC-IV-MSR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 B.4 Triage Level Prediction: MIMIC-IV-TLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 B.5 Multi-Defendant Legal Charge Prediction: MUD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 B.6 Penalty Legal Prediction: CMDL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 B.7 Financial Costumer Intent Routing: Banking77 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 B.8 Entity-Aware Financial Sentiment Analysis: SEntFiN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 B.9 AIOps Root Cause Analysis: RCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 B.10 AIOps Log Fault Diagnosis: LFD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 B.11 Text-to-SQL: SPIDER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 B.12 Knowledge-Augmented Text-to-SQL: BIRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 B.13 Household Embodied Decision Making: ALFWorld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 B.14 Scientific Embodied Decision Making: ScienceWorld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 B.15 Web-based Deep Search: 2Wiki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 B.16 Complex Tabular Reasoning on Electronic Health Records: MIMIC-III . . . . . . 34 

C Supplementary Results 34 

C.1 Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 C.2 Detailed Overall Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 C.3 Ablation Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 C.4 Extension of CASCADE to Multiple Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 C.5 Human-in-the-loop Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 

D Coverage Gap Analysis 41 E Neural-Linear Logistic Bandit: Neural-LinLogUCB 43 

E.1 Preliminary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 E.2 Neural-Linear Logistic Bandit Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 E.3 Regret Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 E.4 Proof of the Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 

References for Supplementary Notes 56 

> 24

Table S1: Summary statistics of the DTLBench. The maximum steps refer to the maximum number of interaction steps that the environment allows per task.                                                             

> Property Domain Task Dataset Maximum Steps Number of Samples
> Single-turn Medical Medical Diagnosis DDXPlus 13136 Medication Recommendation MIMIC-IV-MR 12881 Medical Specialty Referral MIMIC-IV-MSR 12115 Triage Level Prediction MIMIC-IV-TLP 12200 Legal Multi-Defendant Legal Charge Prediction MUD 11740 Penalty Legal Prediction CMDL 12080 Financial Financial Costumer Intent Routing Banking77 15000 Entity-Aware Financial Sentiment Analysis SEntFiN 12299 AIOps AIOps Root Cause Analysis RCA 12925 AIOps Log Fault Diagnosis LFD 13000 Coding Text-to-SQL SPIDER 12147 Knowledge-Augmented Text-to-SQL BIRD 11534 Multi-turn, Simulated Embodied Houshold Embodied Decision Making ALFWorld 30 2000 Scientific Embodied Decision Making ScienceWorld 10-30 1857 Multi-turn, Real-world Information Seeking Web-based Deep Search 2Wiki 52500 Medical Complex Tabular Reasoning on Electronic Health Records MIMIC-III 52500

# A Comparison with Existing Works 

LLM Agents with Experiential Learning. Recently, researchers have begun exploring experiential learning for LLM agents 1, emphasising policy improvement through experiences collected through interactions with the environment, instead of relying on human data. One line of this work is agentic reinforcement learning 2, which leverages RL algorithms to finetune LLM agents based on a given offline task set. Among these methods, proximal policy optimisation (PPO) 3, group relative policy optimisation (GRPO) 4, and their variants have been widely adopted across diverse agentic applications 5,6,7 . However, these approaches rely on backpropagation across the LLM’s parameters, making them unsuitable for online settings where agents must continually adapt to a stream of tasks. Moreover, they assume that each task supports repeated rollouts for policy optimisation, whereas in our setting only a single reward observation is available per task. Another line of work investigates experiential learning via context engineering 8, which can be broadly divided into prompt-based and memory-based approaches. For prompt-based methods, TextGrad 9 and Feedback Descent 10 iteratively update prompts using feedback obtained through repeated trials on a single query. In contrast, DSPy 11 and GEPA 12 focus on automatic prompt or system optimisation to learn from a fixed offline training set for policy learning. Closely related to our work, ICRL 13 evolves prompts across a stream of tasks via in-context reinforcement learning with LLMs; however, its ability to support continual adaptation is constrained by its reliance on short-term memory mechanisms. For memory-based methods, such as Agent KB 14 , Memento 15 ,and FLEX 16 , they typically maintain structured external memory to store and reuse experiences for policy improvement. However, they still follow the conventional training-testing paradigm and remain static during the deployment stage. Different from the aforementioned methods, deployment-time learning emphasises experiential learning in an online and gradient-free manner, where agents should continuously improve their policies over a stream of tasks without modifying the parameters of the underlying LLM. The most closely related work is the online setting introduced in DC 17 and ACE 18 , both of which 

25 develop agentic workflows to achieve incremental context adaptation for deployment-time learning. However, as noted in ACE 18 , these approaches depend on strong underlying LLMs to achieve stable improvements, potentially limiting their robustness across different model scales and deployment scenarios. Moreover, despite their early progress, they lack a principled learning mechanism, an important gap that this work aims to address. From this perspective, DC and ACE can be regarded as important precursors that highlight both the promise and the challenges of this setting, rather than as complete formulations of the broader deployment-time learning paradigm. 

Case-Based Reasoning with LLMs. Case-based reasoning 19,20,21 is a classic AI paradigm that emphasises the retrieval and adaptation of the past relevant cases while retaining new cases to the case bank. Recently, it has been integrated into LLM agents and has demonstrated strong performance across a variety of application domains 22 . Conceptually, CBR is closely related to two widely adopted techniques in LLM systems: in-context learning (ICL) 23,24 and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 25,26 . ICL can be viewed as a static form of case reuse, where a small set of demonstrations is manually curated and fixed at inference time. In contrast, CBR maintains an explicit and evolving episodic memory that is continuously updated through interaction. This distinction allows CBR to accumulate experience over time, rather than relying on a fixed prompt design. Importantly, ICL establishes a natural lower bound for CBR: even when the retrieved cases are less relevant, CBR generally maintains performance similar to standard ICL and typically does not fall below zero-shot LLM performance. Compared with RAG, which conditions generation on unstructured text retrieved from static corpora, CBR retrieves, reuses and revises structured cases within a continuously evolving memory. Among prior works on CBR with LLMs, DS-Agent 27 is a pioneering example, showcasing how empowering LLMs with CBR enables effective automated data science workflows. Re4 28 intro-duces offline alignment to optimise the retrieval and reuse steps within a CBR-based automated software testing system. CBR-DDI 29 explores the hybrid retrieval mechanism and knowledge-based prompting strategy for drug–drug interaction prediction with the CBR framework. Memento 15,30,31 

further applies CBR to deep research tasks, achieving new state-of-the-art performance on the GAIA leaderboard 32 . By formalising case retrieval as a contextual bandit problem, CASCADE provides a principled mechanism for balancing exploration and exploitation, enabling no-regret learning and distinguishing it from prior empirical CBR works. Furthermore, different from these domain-specific methods, our work develops a general and scalable framework and demonstrates its effectiveness across diverse agentic tasks. 

Contextual Bandits for LLMs. Contextual bandit algorithms offer a principled framework for online decision-making by balancing exploration and exploitation conditioned on the observed con-text, and they have been successfully applied across a range of domains, particularly in information retrieval 33,34,35 . Recently, several works have investigated the use of contextual bandits for LLMs, aiming to bridge the gap between practical applications and theoretically grounded online learning. INSTINCT 36 formulates prompt optimisation for LLMs as a contextual bandit problem, and applies NeuralUCB 37 to find the optimal prompt with a given validation set. EASE 38 extends this line of work by leveraging contextual bandits to find an ordering-aware set of examples that improves the in-context learning performance of LLMs. PILOT 39 utilises LinUCB 33 to model user preferences for LLM routing, while Poon et al. 40 extend it to the multi-step LLM selection setting. In contrast to these works that rely on a fixed feature extractor, our method decouples representation learning from uncertainty estimation, enabling end-to-end optimisation of reward learning. Furthermore, we investigate a distinct setting, i.e., deployment-time learning under the CBR framework with LLMs. 

> 26

# B Benchmark Details 

In this work, we benchmark the deployment-time learning capabilities of LLM agents with 16 diverse tasks, including 12 single-turn tasks, 2 multi-turn simulated tasks and 2 multi-turn real-world tasks. For each task, we randomly shuffle all the samples into a fixed online query sequence to ensure fair and reproducible comparison, except for LFD where we order the samples based on the logging timestamp. We refer to this benchmark as DTLBench and summarise the statistics in Table S1. We present the details of each task as below. 

## B.1 Medical Diagnosis: DDXPlus 

Automated medical diagnosis systems have the potential to significantly improve healthcare ac-cessibility, reduce diagnostic delays, and support clinicians with timely, evidence-based decision making. We utilise DDXPlus 41 , a large-scale dataset for medical diagnosis, as the dataset, where the agent should predict the correct diagnosis from a set of 49 pathologies based on a given patient profile. Following StreamBench 42 , we merge its preprocessed validation set and test set as the final dataset, consisting of 3136 samples in total. While DDXPlus is synthetic, it remains the largest public benchmark for medical diagnosis, and is widely used in research due to its high-quality data. In this work, we incorporate DDXPlus as a proof of concept to illustrate how LLM agents can benefit from deployment-time learning in medical diagnostic tasks. 

Reward Function. If the prediction is correct, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Example Query for DDXPlus 

> Sex: Male, Age: 53 - I have recently had a viral infection. - I have had a pericarditis. - I have pain somewhere related to my reason for consulting. - I am experiencing shortness of breath or difficulty breathing in a significant way. - My symptoms are worse when lying down and alleviated while sitting up. - On a scale of 0-10, the pain intensity is 7 - On a scale of 0-10, the pain’s location precision is 4 - On a scale of 0-10, the pace at which the pain appear is 6 - The pain is: * a knife stroke * sharp - The pain locations are: * breast(R) * breast(L) - The pain radiates to these locations: * thoracic spine * posterior chest wall(L)

## B.2 Medication Recommendation: MIMIC-IV-MR 

Medication recommendation systems can assist clinicians in selecting appropriate treatments, reduc-ing prescription errors, and improving patient safety. MIMIC-IV 43 is a large-scale real-world clinical database sourced from the electronic health record of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. We follow the script provided by LEADER 44 to extract the single-visit medication recommendation 

27 dataset, which consists of 2881 samples. For each sample, the agent should recommend a set of medications based on the provided diagnosis and procedure. There are 122 available mediations in total. 

Reward Function. As this is a recommendation task, we compare the recommended mediations with the ground-truth prescription. We follow the original work 44 to utilise the Jaccard similarity score as the evaluation metric. Given the recommended mediation set y and the ground-truth mediation set ˆy, the Jaccard similarity score is calculated as: Jaccard (y, ˆy) = |y ∩ ˆy||y ∪ ˆy|.

If the Jaccard similarity score is greater than 0.2, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Note that we reveal the ground-truth mediation set after the answer is submitted to simulate the real-world scenarios for this task. Below is an example query from MIMIC-IV-MR. As the dataset is distributed under a restricted license, detailed patient information has been omitted. Example Query for MIMIC-IV-MR 

> In this visit, he has diagnosis: <DIAGNOSIS> procedures: <PROCEDURES>

## B.3 Medical Specialty Referral: MIMIC-IV-MSR 

Medical specialty referral systems help guide patients to the most appropriate clinical department. When referrals are incorrect, they can cause delayed diagnoses, unnecessary transfers, and extended patient discomfort. We follow MedLLMBench 45 to extract medical specialty referral tasks from the large-scale real-world clinical database MIMIC-IV 43 . After preprocessing, we obtain a total of 2115 samples, where the agent is required to select the most appropriate medical specialty from 19 possible options based on the given patient profile. 

Reward Function. If the referral prediction exactly matches the ground truth, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Below is an example query from MIMIC-IV-MSR. As the dataset is distributed under a restricted license, detailed patient information has been omitted. Example Query for MIMIC-IV-MSR 

> Gender: <GENDER>, Race: <RACE>, Age: <AGE>. <SYMPTOM>

## B.4 Triage Level Prediction: MIMIC-IV-TLP 

Accurate triage decisions are critical for prioritising limited emergency care resources and ensuring that patients in life-threatening conditions receive timely attention. We follow MedLLMBench 45 to extract triage level prediction tasks from the large-scale real-world clinical database MIMIC-IV 43 .After preprocessing, we obtain a total of 2200 samples, where the agent is required to predict the triage level defined by the Emergency Severity Index (ESI) 46 based on the given patient profile. 

> 28

Reward Function. If the triage level prediction exactly matches the ground truth, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Below is an example query from MIMIC-IV-TLP. As the dataset is distributed under a restricted license, detailed patient information has been omitted. Example Query for MIMIC-IV-TLP 

> Gender: <GENDER>, Race: <RACE>, Age: <AGE>. <SYMPTOM>

## B.5 Multi-Defendant Legal Charge Prediction: MUD 

Legal charge prediction systems can improve judicial efficiency by assisting prosecutors and legal professionals in identifying appropriate charges based on case facts. MUD 47 is a real-world multi-defendant legal charge prediction dataset sourced from the Chinese government website China Judgment Online (CJO) *. We utilise the training split of the original dataset as the online dataset, consisting of 1740 samples and 22 charges. For each sample, the agent is provided with the fact description, and then required to recommend charges for each defendant. To make our dataset more accessible to non-Chinese speakers, we translate the whole dataset into English by prompting 

gpt-4o .

Reward Function. A reward of 1 is assigned if all defendants in the fact description are recom-mended with correct charges; otherwise, the reward is 0. Example Query for MUD 

> Upon trial, it was found that from February to September 2017, the defendant <Defendant A>, at locations including No. 64 Qishan West Road, Huanggu District, Shenyang City, fabricated his ability to arrange jobs to victims Gao Mou1 and Gao Mou2. After gaining the trust of victims Gao Mou1 and Gao Mou2, <Defendant A> instructed the defendant <Defendant B> to impersonate Human Resources Section Chief Chi Mou twice within the Shen Mou Courtyard. <Defendant B> handed over job transfer procedures to the victims. The victims Gao Mou1 and Gao Mou2 paid a total of RMB 25,000 to <Defendant A> via bank transfer as service fees. The illicit money has been squandered.

## B.6 Penalty Legal Prediction: CMDL 

Penalty recommendation systems can support judges and legal practitioners by providing consistent, data-driven insights during sentencing. CMDL 48 is a large-scale real-world multi-defendant legal judgement prediction dataset sourced from the Chinese government website China Judgment Online (CJO). We employ the test split of CMDL-big as the seed dataset and perform basic cleaning and filtering to construct the final dataset, which consists of 2080 samples. For each sample, the agent is provided with a fact description and tasked with recommending appropriate penalties for each defendant. The possible penalty types include Surveillance, Detention, Imprisonment, Death Penalty, Life Imprisonment, and Fine. Notably, there may be multiple penalties for each defendant, which increases the complexity of the task. To make our dataset more accessible to non-Chinese speakers, we translate the whole dataset into English by prompting gpt-4o .

Reward Function. A reward of 1 is assigned if all defendants in the fact description are recom-mended with correct penalties; otherwise, the reward is 0. 

> *https://wenshu.court.gov.cn/

29 Example Query for CMDL 

Upon trial, it was found: 1. On the night of July 8, 2013, the defendants Chen, Liu, and Chu conspired in advance to snatch a gold necklace in the room of the Renhe Hotel at Chicheng Street, Tiantai County. After coming to an agreement, the three took a moped driven by Chu to Shiliang Bay Park near the bridge on Jiuchang Road, Chicheng Street, Tiantai County. When the victim, Ding, got on an electric bike, Chen snatched a gold necklace from around Ding’s neck. After succeeding, they fled the scene on Chu’s moped. Subsequently, Chu and Liu sold the stolen gold necklace to Seagull Goldsmiths for 3,600 yuan. The appraisal determined that the stolen gold necklace was valued at 5,450 yuan. The gold from the necklace has been returned to the victim after being remelted. 2. In the afternoon of July 9, 2013, defendants Chen and Liu agreed to snatch another gold necklace. Liu drove the moped carrying Chen to a road outside Tiantai Vocational and Technical Secondary School on Tiantaishan Middle Road in Tiantai County, approached Yang, who was riding an electric bike, and Chen snatched the gold necklace from around Yang’s neck. The appraisal determined that the stolen gold necklace was valued at 4,860 yuan, and the necklace has been returned to the victim. After the incident, defendant Chu assisted the police in capturing one suspect. In summary, defendants Chen and Liu committed two instances of snatching, gaining property valued at a total of 10,310 yuan. Defendant Chu participated in one instance, gaining property valued at 5,450 yuan. The aforementioned facts were not disputed by defendants Chen, Liu, and Chu during the court hearing. Their confessions are consistent with the statements of the victims, Ding and Yang, and the testimony of witness Ying. The evidence includes the Appraisal Conclusion Document, Identification Record, Scene Investigation Record, Appraisal Opinion, Criminal Judgment, Video Material, Seizure and Return Lists, Incident-related Mobile Inventory, Proof, Tiantai Seagull Goldsmiths Register, Household Registration Certificate, Account of Arrest, and Description of Previous Offenses, all of which are sufficient to establish the facts. 

## B.7 Financial Costumer Intent Routing: Banking77 

Accurate intent routing plays a crucial role in modern financial customer service systems, where users expect fast and precise support for a wide range of banking needs. Banking77 49 is a financial user intent routing dataset with 77 fine-grained intents. Given the large size of the original dataset, full-scale evaluation is computationally expensive. Therefore, we randomly downsample 5000 samples to construct our final dataset. For each sample, the agent is provided with a customer service query and tasked with routing it to the corresponding intent category. 

Reward Function. If the prediction is correct, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Example Query for Banking77 

I have checked the account information several times to be sure that it is correct, but the in country transfer I did a few days ago still has not appeared! What is the hold up? 

## B.8 Entity-Aware Financial Sentiment Analysis: SEntFiN 

Financial news often conveys subtle sentiment targeted at specific entities such as companies, commodities, or markets. Accurately identifying sentiment at an entity level can support analysts, traders, and automated financial systems in understanding market signals more precisely. SEntFiN 50 

is an entity-aware sentiment analysis dataset for financial news. We utilise the training split of the original dataset to construct the final dataset. To increase task difficulty, we retain only samples containing multiple entities, resulting in 2299 instances. For each sample, the agent is presented with a news headline and required to identify all mentioned entities along with their associated sentiment (positive or negative). 

30 Reward Function. A reward of 1 is assigned if all entities in a headline are correctly extracted and their corresponding sentiments are accurately predicted; otherwise, the reward is 0. Example Query for SEntFiN 

> ITC, Godrej Consumer, United Spirits & Jubilant Foods top bets in consumer sector for 2015: CLSA

## B.9 AIOps Root Cause Analysis: RCA 

Efficient root cause analysis is essential in large-scale information technology operations, where system reliability directly influences business continuity and user experience. RCA 51 is a real-world root cause analysis dataset for AIOps collected from Huawei’s public forums. We merge the router and switch subset from the original paper to construct our final dataset, resulting in 2925 samples in total. For each task, the agent is provided a segment of the log, and required to indicate the type of the alert. 

Reward Function. If the prediction is correct, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Example Query for RCA 

> WLAN/4/hwApVapStaFullTrap:OID [oid] VAP has the max number of stations notify.(APMAC=[OPAQUE], APName=[STRING], RADIOID=[INTEGER], WLANID=[INTEGER], FailCause=[INTEGER], Permit-Num=[INTEGER], APID=[INTEGER])

## B.10 AIOps Log Fault Diagnosis: LFD 

Fault diagnosis in cloud environments is critical for ensuring service availability, performance stability, and operational efficiency. We collect LFD dataset sourced from a past public AIOps competition †, which is publicly available now ‡. The competition dataset is derived from real-world log data collected on Alibaba Cloud. We follow an open-sourced notebook § to preprocess the dataset and select the first 3000 samples based on chronological order to construct the final dataset. Each sample consists of a segment of logs, and the agent is tasked with diagnosing the corresponding fault type-central processing unit (CPU), memory, or hardware. 

Reward Function. If the prediction is correct, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Example Query for LFD 

> memory #0xe2 | correctable ecc | asserted. memory #0xe2 | correctable ecc | asserted

## B.11 Text-to-SQL: SPIDER 

Text-to-SQL systems can significantly lower the barrier for accessing structured data, enabling users without database expertise to query complex information through natural language. SPIDER 52 is a large and high-quality text-to-SQL dataset. We utilise the test split of the original dataset as the final 

> †https://tianchi.aliyun.com/competition/entrance/531947
> ‡https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/121954
> §https://tianchi.aliyun.com/notebook/357437

31 dataset, consisting of 2147 samples. For each sample, the agent is provided the database schema and the query problem, and is required to generated SQL code script to solve the problem. 

Reward Function. We utilise the execution accuracy as the evaluation metric. If the generated SQL script can be executed successfully and return the ground-truth answer of the problem, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Example Query for SPIDER 

> Here is the database schema: <DATABASE_SCHEMA> Question: How many authors do we have?

## B.12 Knowledge-Augmented Text-to-SQL: BIRD 

Different from SPIDER, BIRD 53 is another text-to-SQL dataset that requires domain-specific knowledge to solve the given query problem. We utilise the development split of the original dataset as the final dataset, consisting of 1534 samples. For each sample, the agent is provided the database schema, the query problem, and the related domain-specific knowledge, and then is required to generated SQL code script to solve the problem. 

Reward Function. Similar to SPIDER, we utilise the execution accuracy as the evaluation metric. If the generated SQL script can be executed successfully and return the ground-truth answer of the problem, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Example Query for BIRD 

> Here is the database schema: <DATABASE_SCHEMA> Question: How many elders obtained the “Supporter” badge? Tips: “Supporter” is the Name of badge; elders refers to Age > 65

## B.13 Household Embodied Decision Making: ALFWorld 

Household embodied decision-making tasks represent a crucial step toward deploying intelligent agents in real physical environments. ALFWorld 54 is a household embodied interactive environment with six different task types. We utilise the train and unseen split of the original paper as the final dataset. Specifically, we randomly downsample 1866 tasks from the train split, and combine them with all 134 tasks from the unseen split to form the final online dataset. In each task, the agent receives a natural-language task description and then sequentially interacts with the environment to achieve the goal. The maximum number of interaction steps is set to 30. 

Reward Function. We adopt the original ALFWorld reward function: the agent receives a reward of 1 upon successful task completion within 30 steps, and 0 otherwise. 

> 32

Example Initial Query for ALFWorld 

> You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a cabinet 13, a cabinet 12, a cabinet 11, a cabinet 10, a cabinet 9, a cabinet 8, a cabinet 7, a cabinet 6, a cabinet 5, a cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a cabinet 1, a coffeemachine 1, a countertop 1, a drawer 5, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a fridge 1, a garbagecan 1, a microwave 1, a sinkbasin 1, a stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a stoveburner 2, a stoveburner 1, and a toaster 1. Your task is to: heat some cup and put it in cabinet.

## B.14 Scientific Embodied Decision Making: ScienceWorld 

Scientific embodied reasoning tasks help develop agents that can perform experiments, test hypothe-ses, and reason about cause–effect relationships in dynamic environments. ScienceWorld 55 is a scientific embodied interactive environment at the level of a standard elementary school science curriculum. We select 11 different types of tasks, including use-thermometer , test-conductivity , test-conductivity-of-unknown-substances , find-animal , find-living-thing , find-non-living-thing , find-plant ,

grow-plant , lifespan-longest-lived , lifespan-longest-lived-then-shortest-lived , and lifespan-shortest-lived . For each task, we randomly sample approximately 200 variations to form the final dataset, with 1857 tasks in total. In each task, the agent receives a natural-language task description and then sequentially interacts with the environment to achieve the goal. The maximum number of interaction steps is set to the recommended number, ranging from 10 to 30. 

Reward Function. We extend the original ScienceWorld reward function to the sparse reward setting: the agent receives a reward of 1 if the environment score achieves 100, and 0 otherwise. Example Initial Query for ScienceWorld 

> Your task is to find a(n) plant. First, focus on the thing. Then, move it to the orange box in the bathroom. This room is called the living room. In it, you see: the agent, a substance called air, a chair (On the chair is: nothing.), a couch (On the couch is: a white pillow.), a finger painting, a table (On the table is: nothing.). You also see: A door to the hallway (that is open). In your inventory, you see: an orange.

## B.15 Web-based Deep Search: 2Wiki 

Deep search is a critical capability for modern web-based question answering. 2Wiki 56 is a multi-hop question-answering dataset. We adopt the development split as the seed dataset for preprocessing. Specifically, we remove relatively simple instances (e.g., yes–no and multiple-choice questions) and then randomly sample 2500 tasks to construct the final dataset. For each task, the agent is given a user query and then iteratively invokes appropriate tools to acquire evidence and progress toward an answer. The interaction horizon is limited to a maximum of five steps. 

Reward Function. We follow previous works 15,57 to utilise LLM-as-judge to judge the correctness of the answer with gpt-4o-mini . The agent receives a reward of 1 if the LLM judges that the answer matches the ground truth, and 0 otherwise. Example Query for 2Wiki 

> Which country Zubaidah Bint Ja’Far’s husband is from?

33 B.16 Complex Tabular Reasoning on Electronic Health Records: MIMIC-III 

Accessing and retrieving patient data from electronic health records is significant for routine clinical practice. We utilise MIMIC-III 58 , a real-world clinical dataset to benchmark the complex tabular reasoning capabilities of LLM agents. Specifically, we utilise the processed dataset from EHRSQL 59 

and follow EHRAgent 60 to filter unverifiable queries. After that, we randomly sample 2500 tasks to construct the final dataset. For each task, the agent is given a user query and then iteratively interacts with the workspace via Python script to derive the final answer. The interaction horizon is limited to a maximum of five steps. 

Reward Function. We utilise the execution accuracy as the evaluation metric. If the generated Python script can be executed successfully and return the ground-truth answer of the problem, a reward of 1 is assigned; otherwise, 0. Example Query for MIMIC-III 

> count the number of times that patient 73713 had received a vancomycin laboratory test during this hospital visit.

# C Supplementary Results 

In this section, we describe the experimental setup and provide additional empirical results. 

## C.1 Implementation Details 

Model Configuration. We serve the Qwen3-series LLMs 61 via the vLLM framework 62 with bfloat16 precision for efficient inference. Across all settings, we set the sampling temperature to 0.1, the top-p value to 0.8, the top-k value to 20, and the presence penalty to 1.5. For faster responses, we use the non-thinking mode during inference. The specific model versions for each model size are listed below. • Qwen3-32B : Qwen3-32B (https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-32B ). • Qwen3-14B : Qwen3-14B (https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-14B ). • Qwen3-8B : Qwen3-8B (https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-8B ). • Qwen3-4B : Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-4B-Ins truct-2507 ). • Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 : Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 (https://huggingface. co/Qwen/Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 ). We exclude the original Qwen3-4B model because its mixed-thinking-mode training pipeline results in inferior performance. In its place, we employ the newly open-sourced instruct variant. We only utilise Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 for deep search tasks due to its advanced tool-calling capabilities. For the close-sourced LLM, we utilise gemini-2.0-flash via the API, and set the sampling temperature to 0.05, and the top-p value to 0.8. Note that we do not use the most advanced Gemini-2.5-series LLMs 63 because its overly restrictive safety policy results in frequent response refusals on many DTLBench tasks. 

> 34

Table S2: Hyper-parameters for REINFORCE+LoRA. Name Value 

Matrix rank in LoRA 8

Scaling factor in LoRA 16 

Target modules in LoRA Q projections and V projections Dropout in LoRA 0.0

Bias learning in LoRA No Batch size 32 

KL coefficient 0.1

Optimiser AdamW Learning rate {3e − 6, 1e − 5, 3e − 5, 1e − 4}

Weight decay 1e − 5

For retrieval models, we utilise gte-modernbert-base as the pretrained embedding model for first-stage retrieval, and gte-reranker-modernbert-base as the base reranker model for reranking 64,65 .Both are built on top of ModernBERT 66 , a modernised bidirectional encoder-only Transformer model with the context length of 8,192. The specific model versions are listed as below. • Embedding model : gte-modernbert-base (https://huggingface.co/Alibaba-NLP/gte -modernbert-base ). • Reranking model : gte-reranker-modernbert-base (https://huggingface.co/Alibaba -NLP/gte-reranker-modernbert-base ). 

Baselines. As there are few related works that investigate the deployment-time learning setting, we include the following methods as our baselines. Note that two relevant baselines, DC 17 and ACE 18 , are proposed under the online adaptation setting in their respective papers. However, both methods rely on significantly stronger backbone LLMs than Qwen3-32B to effectively support the reasoning required by their context engineering strategies. Results reported in ACE 18 further show that these approaches can even lead to performance degradation when applied to weaker open-source backbone LLMs. Therefore, we do not include them as baselines. • Zero-shot . This baseline relies solely on the foundational capabilities of the underlying LLM and does not utilise any reward feedback from the environment, thus serving as a reference point for performance without deployment-time learning. • ICRL 13 . This baseline utilises the in-context learning and reflection capabilities of LLMs to implement in-context reinforcement learning. Specifically, it provides the most recent K trials directly within the prompt, with each trial consisting of the query, the generated solution, as well as the reward feedback. • ICRLPlus 13 . This baseline extends ICRL by including only the most recent K correct trials in the prompt, serving as a reference point for evaluating pure in-context learning performance. • NP-CBR . This baseline represents the non-parametric variant of CBR, which has been widely adopted by previous works 27,15 . It relies solely on the pretrained reranker model’s capabilities, without any online adaptation based on reward feedback. Thus, it also serves as an ablation of our CASCADE framework, isolating the impact of the proposed bandit-based retrieval policy. 

> 35

Table S3: Hyper-parameters for CASCADE. Name Symbol Value 

Number of cases for reranking K 32 

Exploration coefficient α {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}

Regularisation strength λ 0.1

Batch size 32 

Training interval H 32 

Optimiser AdamW Learning rate η {1e − 6, 3e − 6, 1e − 5, 2e − 5}

Weight decay 1e − 5

• REINFORCE+LoRA 67,68 . This baseline represents the most advanced parametric baseline that integrates the industrial success of on-policy RL with LoRA finetuning techniques. We summarise the hyper-parameter setting of REINFORCE+LoRA in Table S2, where we perform the hyper-parameter tuning on learning rate for each task. 

Implementation details of CASCADE. We summarise the hyper-parameter setting of CASCADE in Table S3. We first tune the learning rate for each task while fixing the exploration coefficient to 0. Then, using the best learning rate, we further tune the exploration coefficient. As with REINFORCE+LoRA, the learning rate is the most critical hyper-parameter for CASCADE. In contrast, we have shown in the main paper that CASCADE is robust to the exploration coefficient. Therefore, the overall tuning effort is comparable to that of the REINFORCE+LoRA baseline. In practice, we suggest the users tuning hyper-parameters with a small-scale online experiments before deployment, which is also the best practice for online learning algorithms 37,69,70,36,38 .

## C.2 Detailed Overall Results 

For clarity and ease of future reference, we summarise all main results in Table S4, including the mean values and standard deviations. For Qwen3-4B , we do not report results on MIMIC-IV-MR due to its near-zero performance on this task. For gemini-2.0-flash , we do not report results on MIMIC-IV-MR, MIMIC-IV-MSR, MIMIC-IV-TLP due to the restricted dataset license. 

## C.3 Ablation Studies 

Here, we perform the ablation studies of CASCADE in 12 single-turn tasks in DTLBench and aggregate the results in Table S5. Specifically, we consider the following ablation variants: • Zero-shot . We include this baseline as the ablation variant of CASCADE that does not perform deployment-time learning. • CASCADE w/o Neural-LinLogUCB . This is exactly the non-parametric baseline NP-CBR, which does not utilise the reward feedback to adapt the retriever policy. • CASCADE w/o Exploration . This ablation variant only performs exploitation during retrieval by setting the exploration coefficient α to 0. • CASCADE w/ LinLogUCB . This ablation variant replaces the proposed Neural-LinLogUCB by LinLogUCB 71 , which merely learns a linear weight based on the representation derived from the pretrained reranker model. We tune the exploration coefficient for each task. 

> 36 Table S4: Detailed overall comparison across 12 single-turn tasks in DTLBench.  We report the mean and standard deviation over five random seeds. For each task and model, the best performance is highlighted in bold. ‘N/A’ indicates missing results:  Qwen3-4B  fails to run in the MIMIC-IV-MR dataset, and  gemini-2.0-flash  is not permitted due to dataset licensing restrictions.
> DDXPlus  MIMIC-IV -MR MIMIC-IV -MSR MIMIC-IV -TLP  MUD  CMDL  Banking77  SEntFiN  RCA  LFD  SPIDER  BIRD  Average
> Qwen3-4B
> Zero-shot  36.58 ±0.16  N/A  50.53 ±0.12  26.85 ±0.61  34.72 ±0.04  19.24 ±0.12  62.33 ±0.04  24.72 ±0.05  23.52 ±0.06  81.92 ±0.05  70.15 ±0.19  52.07 ±0.16  43.88
> ICRL  44.52 ±0.08  N/A  51.01 ±0.09  28.43 ±0.15  35.90 ±0.07  21.60 ±0.20  62.92 ±0.06  27.15 ±0.08  21.72 ±0.09  83.31 ±0.05  71.69 ±0.17  51.71 ±0.22  45.45
> ICRLPlus  44.11 ±0.06  N/A  50.10 ±0.16  31.69 ±0.19  38.89 ±0.09  27.88 ±0.27  63.04 ±0.03  27.99 ±0.09  26.05 ±0.04  83.37 ±0.04  71.67 ±0.15  52.86 ±0.25  47.06
> NP-CBR  62.69 ±0.23  N/A  56.56 ±0.05  34.93 ±0.37  44.84 ±0.06  45.92 ±0.24  77.36 ±0.06  35.19 ±0.27  53.70 ±0.19  85.42 ±0.05  73.43 ±0.18  52.93 ±0.11  56.63
> REINFORCE+LoRA  61.39 ±0.53  N/A  59.65 ±0.64  44.70 ±1.60  47.69 ±0.82  45.89 ±2.12  65.89 ±0.48  35.66 ±1.64  49.31 ±0.94  85.57 ±0.44  73.42 ±0.55  53.12 ±0.30  56.57
> CASCADE (Ours)  70.04 ±1.07  N/A  57.43 ±0.33  36.33 ±0.60  46.87 ±0.36  49.12 ±0.80  80.10 ±0.30  37.96 ±0.25  57.45 ±0.82  86.45 ±0.18  75.90 ±0.88  54.59 ±0.50  59.29
> Qwen3-8B
> Zero-shot  45.20 ±0.11  5.94 ±0.25  50.49 ±0.24  35.60 ±0.49  39.76 ±0.06  36.22 ±0.15  61.37 ±0.04  26.49 ±0.12  38.08 ±0.03  74.61 ±0.07  60.96 ±0.28  43.96 ±0.15  43.22
> ICRL  49.50 ±0.09  3.19 ±0.21  53.40 ±0.18  46.76 ±0.13  40.68 ±0.13  29.40 ±0.24  60.43 ±0.06  26.12 ±0.15  21.11 ±0.12  81.53 ±0.08  67.66 ±0.12  43.25 ±0.31  43.59
> ICRLPlus  48.57 ±0.13  23.36 ±0.40  55.23 ±0.24  48.75 ±0.13  42.48 ±0.08  31.69 ±0.13  60.45 ±0.02  27.97 ±0.05  28.55 ±0.26  80.98 ±0.05  68.19 ±0.09  44.86 ±0.18  46.76
> NP-CBR  65.44 ±0.16  52.85 ±0.48  62.73 ±0.17  49.91 ±0.25  45.45 ±0.12  46.86 ±0.15  78.92 ±0.22  38.04 ±0.06  60.93 ±0.06  85.30 ±0.08  66.74 ±0.37  48.11 ±0.21  58.44
> REINFORCE+LoRA  65.55 ±0.48  4.94 ±0.17  64.16 ±0.16  52.04 ±2.76  48.85 ±0.56  51.67 ±1.78  68.84 ±0.45  43.19 ±0.88  54.17 ±0.25  86.37 ±0.07  69.08 ±0.43  44.77 ±0.33  54.47
> CASCADE (Ours)  69.13 ±0.37  54.88 ±0.46  63.97 ±0.48  51.20 ±0.24  47.90 ±0.48  47.75 ±1.54  80.78 ±0.38  39.77 ±0.67  66.91 ±0.35  86.40 ±0.43  72.70 ±0.69  48.66 ±0.46  60.84
> Qwen3-14B
> Zero-shot  55.75 ±0.10  11.91 ±0.26  52.92 ±0.09  40.92 ±0.13  50.84 ±0.11  38.65 ±0.15  65.86 ±0.04  33.03 ±0.08  36.66 ±0.13  78.41 ±0.06  66.29 ±0.15  48.75 ±0.10  48.33
> ICRL  56.50 ±0.07  1.18 ±0.90  54.65 ±0.15  48.47 ±0.09  49.39 ±0.16  40.52 ±0.12  66.99 ±0.05  32.44 ±0.14  32.03 ±0.11  82.12 ±0.03  69.29 ±0.11  48.59 ±0.19  48.51
> ICRLPlus  56.16 ±0.15  35.39 ±0.41  55.39 ±0.11  49.70 ±0.05  50.09 ±0.09  41.91 ±0.06  67.14 ±0.03  34.71 ±0.12  38.47 ±0.07  82.52 ±0.03  69.39 ±0.06  48.33 ±0.18  52.43
> NP-CBR  70.69 ±0.08  61.28 ±0.42  56.77 ±0.06  53.15 ±0.11  56.33 ±0.51  56.11 ±0.03  81.02 ±0.08  42.98 ±0.10  66.41 ±0.13  85.31 ±0.02  71.57 ±0.45  52.14 ±0.29  62.81
> REINFORCE+LoRA  71.30 ±0.80  11.07 ±0.45  58.21 ±0.73  52.39 ±2.41  53.72 ±0.30  41.38 ±0.14  72.30 ±0.33  44.42 ±1.02  54.11 ±0.82  86.47 ±0.06  72.07 ±0.62  49.17 ±0.46  55.55
> CASCADE (Ours)  75.66 ±0.55  62.35 ±0.40  57.76 ±0.24  54.55 ±0.17  56.95 ±0.27  59.06 ±0.27  82.16 ±0.08  45.10 ±0.27  73.68 ±0.29  85.61 ±0.24  74.66 ±0.61  53.68 ±0.32  65.10
> Qwen3-32B
> Zero-shot  63.77 ±0.11  12.79 ±0.33  51.36 ±0.08  48.56 ±0.14  25.53 ±0.15  39.12 ±0.16  66.66 ±0.03  34.30 ±0.09  45.36 ±0.05  84.05 ±0.05  63.84 ±0.39  44.65 ±0.42  48.33
> ICRL  66.11 ±0.10  12.95 ±2.10  50.82 ±0.13  50.23 ±0.11  57.03 ±0.24  44.06 ±0.26  67.59 ±0.03  33.77 ±0.02  41.83 ±0.05  83.55 ±0.14  70.95 ±0.13  50.86 ±0.23  52.48
> ICRLPlus  64.91 ±0.13  30.29 ±0.83  52.24 ±0.09  51.05 ±0.22  58.33 ±0.22  43.22 ±0.21  67.61 ±0.06  35.39 ±0.28  43.34 ±0.09  83.91 ±0.07  71.11 ±0.17  50.52 ±0.21  54.33
> NP-CBR  80.84 ±0.50  60.58 ±0.20  56.29 ±0.07  51.83 ±0.20  60.93 ±0.28  59.56 ±0.07  82.77 ±0.06  45.35 ±0.11  65.08 ±0.16  85.39 ±0.03  66.87 ±0.25  49.60 ±0.36  63.76
> REINFORCE+LoRA  76.90 ±0.91  13.88 ±0.10  57.47 ±0.55  53.97 ±1.21  60.32 ±0.40  52.63 ±1.11  73.87 ±0.35  47.26 ±0.38  58.20 ±1.86  86.80 ±0.25  73.54 ±0.25  52.35 ±0.09  58.93
> CASCADE (Ours)  84.54 ±0.65  63.98 ±0.32  56.79 ±0.14  52.25 ±0.48  62.44 ±0.26  60.26 ±0.13  84.66 ±0.18  47.72 ±0.35  70.76 ±0.13  86.15 ±0.21  75.41 ±0.46  55.18 ±0.61  66.68
> gemini-2.0-flash
> Zero-shot  69.67 ±0.39  N/A  N/A  N/A  59.61 ±0.07  39.32 ±0.06  73.61 ±0.24  12.92 ±0.30  28.06 ±0.11  83.16 ±0.16  80.66 ±0.14  62.19 ±0.53  56.58
> ICRL  73.79 ±0.07  N/A  N/A  N/A  64.98 ±0.24  55.77 ±0.21  74.10 ±0.08  30.07 ±0.35  28.50 ±0.16  84.70 ±0.04  80.62 ±0.10  62.32 ±0.29  61.65
> ICRLPlus  73.52 ±0.04  N/A  N/A  N/A  66.00 ±0.13  56.55 ±0.11  73.92 ±0.04  31.82 ±0.18  30.09 ±0.17  84.60 ±0.04  80.61 ±0.20  61.99 ±0.16  62.12
> NP-CBR  86.91 ±0.50  N/A  N/A  N/A  66.33 ±0.20  62.05 ±0.10  81.94 ±0.29  37.64 ±0.42  69.02 ±0.18  85.11 ±0.13  82.85 ±0.46  64.30 ±0.28  70.68
> CASCADE (Ours)  90.29 ±0.33  N/A  N/A  N/A  67.13 ±0.39  61.99 ±0.24  83.33 ±0.13  40.79 ±0.62  75.96 ±0.56  86.29 ±0.17  83.05 ±0.16  64.42 ±0.59  72.58

37 Table S5: Ablation studies of CASCADE in 12 single-turn tasks in DTLBench. All the results are based on Qwen3-32B . We report the mean and standard deviation over five random seeds. The best performance for each task is highlighted in bold. 

CASCADE (Ours) Zero-shot CASCADE w/o 

> Neural-LinLogUCB

CASCADE w/o Exploration CASCADE w/ 

> LinLogUCB

CASCADE w/ 

> NeuralLogUCB

CASCADE w/ 

> NeuralLinUCB

DDXPlus 84.54 ±0.65 63.77 ±0.11 80.84 ±0.50 84.09 ±0.46 80.48 ±0.81 81.73 ±0.28 83.96 ±0.36 

MIMIC-IV-MR 63.98 ±0.32 12.79 ±0.33 60.58 ±0.20 63.60 ±0.33 58.63 ±0.59 61.53 ±0.48 61.96 ±1.11 

MIMIC-IV-MSR 52.25 ±0.48 48.56 ±0.14 51.83 ±0.20 50.79 ±0.44 51.80 ±0.40 53.00 ±0.21 51.95 ±0.55 

MIMIC-IV-TLP 56.79 ±0.14 51.36 ±0.08 56.29 ±0.07 57.09 ±0.18 55.54 ±0.51 57.28 ±0.57 56.01 ±0.72 

MUD 62.44 ±0.26 25.53 ±0.15 60.93 ±0.28 62.09 ±0.49 61.41 ±0.48 61.76 ±0.44 60.83 ±0.95 

CMDL 60.26 ±0.13 39.12 ±0.16 59.56 ±0.07 60.18 ±0.40 58.30 ±0.46 60.93 ±0.34 59.13 ±0.28 

Banking77 84.66 ±0.18 66.66 ±0.03 82.77 ±0.06 84.26 ±0.19 79.76 ±0.28 82.40 ±0.41 82.44 ±0.30 

SEntFiN 47.72 ±0.35 34.30 ±0.09 45.35 ±0.11 48.37 ±0.30 41.21 ±0.27 43.92 ±0.86 45.49 ±0.86 

RCA 70.76 ±0.13 45.36 ±0.05 65.08 ±0.16 70.08 ±0.03 65.97 ±0.67 65.19 ±0.24 68.31 ±0.81 

LFD 86.15 ±0.21 84.05 ±0.05 85.39 ±0.03 85.93 ±0.22 85.67 ±0.08 85.47 ±0.27 85.63 ±0.32 

SPIDER 75.41 ±0.46 63.84 ±0.39 66.87 ±0.25 74.74 ±0.81 74.71 ±0.29 75.28 ±0.31 75.62 ±0.57 

BIRD 55.18 ±0.61 44.65 ±0.42 49.60 ±0.36 55.25 ±0.68 53.95 ±0.39 56.21 ±0.20 54.55 ±0.55 

Average 66.68 48.33 63.76 66.37 63.95 65.39 65.49 • CASCADE w/ NeuralLogUCB . This ablation variant replaces the proposed Neural-LinLogUCB by NeuralLogUCB 72 , which learns a neural network based on the representation derived from the pretrained reranker model. We tune the exploration coefficient for each task. • CASCADE w/ Neural-LinUCB . This ablation variant replaces the proposed Neural-LinLogUCB by Neural-LinUCB 73 , which similarly decouples representation learning and uncertainty estima-tion, but learns the reward model with the regression model instead of the logistic model. We tune the exploration coefficient for each task. We can derive the following findings from Table S5. First, LLM agents can benefit from deployment-time learning by incorporating the reward feedback to adaptively adjust the behaviours. As an evidence, Zero-shot consistently shows the poorest performance across all tasks, demonstrating the importance of environmental feedback. Second, CBR agents can further benefit from the reward feedback by adapting the retriever policy via contextual bandit, which brings an additional 2.92 average absolute improvement. Third, the retriever policy in CBR agents must carefully balance exploration and exploitation. Over-reliance on the learned reward model without exploring uncertain cases results in an average absolute performance drop of 0.31. Finally, selecting appropriate assumptions for the reward function in contextual bandits is crucial for CBR agents. On the one hand, a purely linear assumption, combined with a pretrained representation model, struggles to capture the complex interactions between query pairs. As a result, LinLogUCB consistently yields the lowest average performance among the contextual bandits. While incor-porating neural networks into the reward model provides an average improvement of 1.44 over LinLogUCB, NeuralLogUCB remains heavily dependent on pretrained representations and still fail to generalise well across all tasks. In contrast, Neural-LinLogUCB decouples representation learning and uncertainty estimation, enabling end-to-end optimisation of the reward function. This leads to the best average performance of 66.68 across all tasks. On the other hand, established findings from the information retrieval community show that classification-based ranking objectives are typically more appropriate than regression-based ones. Motivated by this insight, CASCADE formulates CBR as a contextual bandit with binary feedback, achieving an additional average improvement of 1.19 over NeuralLinUCB. 

38 C.4 Extension of CASCADE to Multiple Cases 

Previous studies have shown that increasing the number of retrieved cases may bring further performance improvement to the CBR framework 15 . We now extend our analysis of CASCADE to the multiple-case setting. Although the proposed Neural-LinLogUCB algorithm in CASCADE is originally designed for the single-case setting, it can be naturally generalised to multiple cases by following the combinatorial neural bandit framework 74 , which selects the top-k cases with the highest UCB scores. Fig. E1a illustrates the performance of NP-CBR, REINFORCE+LoRA, and CASCADE, as the number of retrieved cases varies. We can find that CASCADE consistently outperforms NP-CBR across most settings, further demonstrating its effectiveness. Moreover, the results indicate that CASCADE’s performance exhibits a steady improvement as the number of retrieved cases increases. Notably, REINFORCE+LoRA surpasses CASCADE in the single-case setting for 3 out of 12 tasks (MIMIC-IV-MSR, MIMIC-IV-TLP, and LFD); however, this gap is closed once the number of retrieved cases increases to 4. This finding underscores the potential of memory-based learning mechanisms to outperform gradient-based ones through appropriate context engineering. Moreover, we evaluate CASCADE on a representative subset of single-turn tasks to investigate how its performance scales with model size and the number of retrieved cases. As illustrated in Fig. E1b, CASCADE generally benefits from retrieving more cases and operating with larger models. However, the upper bound of such performance gain is inherently constrained by the foundational capabilities of the LLMs. Therefore, scaling up the number of retrieved cases alone does not ensure consistent performance gains. Furthermore, we present the results of CASCADE’s absolute improvement over the best-performing non-parametric baseline NP-CBR in Fig. E1c. We observe that CASCADE outperforms NP-CBR in almost all settings, further demonstrating its empirical superiority. 

## C.5 Human-in-the-loop Results 

We have shown that CASCADE can serve as a good deployment-time learner merely based on the binary feedback provided by the environment. In this subsection, we introduce two human-in-the-loop settings to demonstrate how CASCADE can benefit from human interactions to derive better performance. 

Human-involved revision. In many real-world application scenarios, human experts participate in the Revise step to ensure the correctness of generated solutions (Fig. S1a). For example, in our preliminary applied work on automated software testing 28 , human test engineers are responsible for revising the generated test scripts by LLMs. Under this setting, a new case can always be safely retained at each timestep; thus, the coverage gap would be closed faster due to pmin = 1 . We simulate this setting by retaining the case with the ground-truth label in each timestep, and make comparison between CASCADE and the best-performing non-parametric baseline NP-CBR in Fig. S1b. The results show that both CASCADE and NP-CBR benefit from human-involved revision in most settings. Meanwhile, performance deterioration can be observed in MIMIC-MR, MIMIC-MSR, CMDL, and LFD, where the retriever policies of NP-CBR and CASCADE struggle to manage the growing and diverse case bank within limited online timesteps. Importantly, CASCADE consistently outperforms NP-CBR across all settings, highlighting its superior adaptability and efficient learning of the retriever policy.              

> 39 Retriever LLM QA
> Case bank
> Case
> I. Retrieve II. Reuse
> IV. Retain
> ct∼μ(· | qt,Mt)at∼pLLM (· | qt, c t)
> Case
> III. Revise
> (human -involved
> revision)

a b            

> E-E-D Framework
> Explore Exploit UCB
> Condition
> YN
> E-ED
> Retriever Q
> A
> Case bank
> Case
> I. Retrieve
> II. Reuse & Revise
> III. Retain
> ct∼μ(· | qt,Mt)
> arg max c∈Mtmetric (c)>threshold
> Neural -
> LinLogUCB
> Human
> lablelling

c d

eFigure S1: Results for human-in-the-loop settings. All the results are obtained using Qwen3-32B 

and reported based on five different random seeds. a, The CBR framework with human-involved re-vision. b, Success rates of CASCADE and NP-CBR on 12 single-turn tasks, comparing performance with and without human-involved revision. c, The CASCADE method under the exploration-exploitation-discovery (E-E-D) retrieval framework. If the maximum metric value in the case bank exceeds a predefined threshold, CASCADE performs Neural-LinLogUCB to balance exploration and exploitation; otherwise, it queries human experts for labelling. d, Percentage of counterfactual discovery advantage, i.e., the proportion of discovery steps yielding higher counterfactual rewards than exploration-exploitation actions, across four strategies. e, Relative performance gains over standard CASCADE when the discovery is driven by each of the four strategies. 

40 CASCADE under E-E-D retrieval framework. A notable advantage of CASCADE lies in its contextual bandit modelling of the retriever policy, which supports a human-in-the-loop setting where agents selectively seek human expert assistance within a limited budget. This is similar to the exploration-exploitation-discovery (E-E-D) framework in infinitely many-armed bandit literature 75,76 ,where exploitation means selecting an apparently relevant case, exploration means selecting an uncertain case, and discovery means seeking for a novel latent case when no sufficiently relevant cases are believed to exist in the current case bank. To simulate this setting, we provide the agent with a fixed budget of 10% discovery steps across all timesteps, in which it can directly access the ground-truth label (Fig. S1c). For CASCADE, we introduce three discovery metrics: (1) Explore 

refers to the exploration term in Eq. (7), i.e., ∥f (xt,c ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1

, which reflects the uncertainty of the case. (2) Exploit refers to the exploitation term in Eq. (7), i.e., ⟨θt−1, f (xt,c ; ωt−1)⟩, which reflects the learned utility of the case. (3) UCB refers to the UCB score defined in Eq. (7), which reflects the upper confidence bound of the expected utility of the case. A discovery step is triggered when the selected metric’s value falls below a predefined threshold. Since the ranges of these metrics evolve over time, we maintain a first-in-first-out queue of length 16, and dynamically set the threshold to the 10th percentile of the queued values. As a baseline, we introduce the Random 

strategy, which randomly determines whether to perform discovery with a probability of 10%. To assess these discovery strategies, we first report the percentage of counterfactual discovery advantage, i.e., the proportion of discovery steps yielding higher counterfactual rewards than exploration-exploitation actions, in Fig. S1d. As expected, the results indicate that Exploit and UCB are the best-performing discovery metrics, which consistently outperform the others in all the settings. Specifically, the Exploit and UCB strategies trigger discovery whenever no relevant cases exist in the case bank based on the learned utility function and the most optimistic estimate of expected utility, respectively. To further evaluate the benefits of the discovery mechanism, we report the relative improvement of each discovery strategy over standard CASCADE in Fig. S1e. Notably, Exploit and UCB achieve average relative performance gains of 8.83% and 8.73%, respectively, whereas Random provides only a 5.61% improvement. This demonstrates that the contextual bandit modelling in CASCADE provides an effective discovery mechanism. 

# D Coverage Gap Analysis 

In this section, we provide the complete theoretical analyses on the coverage gap of CASCADE. To simplify the analyses, we make the following necessary assumptions: 

Assumption 1. There exists a metric space (Q, d Q) and a constant LQ > 0, such that for any query 

q ∈ Q and any case c = ( q′, a ′, r ′ = 1) , we have 

1 − ¯R(q, c ) ≤ LQ · dQ(q, q ′).

Assumption 1 formalises the principle that similar problems share similar solutions, ensuring that small perturbations in the query would not lead to large variations in the expected utility for LLMs. 

Assumption 2. For query qt, and any case c ∈ { (q, a, r = 1) |q ∈ Q , a ∈ A} ∪ ∅ , there exists a positive constant pmin > 0 such that 

¯R(qt, c ) = Eat∼pLLM (·| qt,c )[R(qt, a t)] ≥ pmin .

> 41

Assumption 2 requires that LLMs maintain a strictly positive probability of generating a correct solution for any query, and that conditioning on any case, even an irrelevant one, does not reduce this probability to zero. We emphasise that this assumption is mainly introduced as a technical simplification to facilitate a clean theoretical analysis. 

Assumption 3. The queries {qt}Tt=1 are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) draws from a distribution P over Q. There exists constants d0 > 0, C0 > 0, and a diameter D ∈ (0 , ∞) such that ∀q ∈ Q and 0 < ε ≤ D,

P(B(q, ε )) ≥ C0εd0 ,

where B(q, ε ) = {q′ ∈ Q | dQ(q, q ′) ≤ ε}.

Assumption 3 models the query stream as i.i.d. draws from a distribution with a mild density condition. This is standard in non-parametric and bandit analyses and prevents degeneracy by ensuring that every metric ball has non-negligible probability mass. This assumption guarantees that similar queries recur with sufficient frequency, allowing the case bank to gradually cover the query space and making sub-linear coverage gap achievable. Now, we can present the coverage gap bound as below. 

Theorem 4. Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, 3 hold. For any δ ∈ (0 , 1) , define t0 := 

l 8 

> pmin

log 

 32 

> δ p min



+ 1 

m

.

Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, the accumulated coverage gap satisfies 

R∆ 

> T

≤ t0 + LQ

2 log  4Tδ



C0pmin 

1/d 0 TX

> t=t0+1

(t − 1) −1/d 0 .

Proof. We first relate ∆t to a nearest-neighbour distance in the case bank Mt. Denote the distance between query qt and the nearest query in the case bank Mt as dt = min (q,a, 1) ∈M t dQ(qt, q ).According to Assumption 1, we have 

∆t = R(qt, a ⋆t ) − ¯R(qt, c ⋆t ) ≤ LQdt. (S1) Next, we derive the high-probability lower bound on the number of the cases in the case bank, i.e., 

Nt = |M t|. By Assumption 2, at each timestep t, we have P(rt = 1 | F t−1) = ¯R(qt, c t) ≥ pmin .Let Ut ∼ Unif(0 , 1) , realise rt = I{Ut ≤ pt} with pt ≥ pmin , and zt = I{Ut ≤ pmin }; thus, we have 

zt ≤ rt. Define Zt = Pt−1 

> s=1

zs ∼ Binomial( t − 1, p min ); thus, we have Nt = Pt−1 

> s=1

rs ≥ Zt. By applying Chernoff bound to Zt, we have 

P



Nt ≤ pmin (t − 1) 2



≤ P



Zt ≤ pmin (t − 1) 2



≤ exp 



−pmin (t − 1) 8



.

Then, we can derive the following union bound over t ≥ t0:

P



∃t ≥ t0 : Nt ≤ pmin (t − 1) 2



≤

> ∞

X

> s=t0

e− pmin (s−1) 8 = e−pmin (t0−1) /8

1 − e−pmin /8 ≤ 16 

pmin 

e−pmin (t0−1) /8 ≤ δ

2,

where the second inequality is because ∀x ∈ (0 , 1) , 1 − e−x ≥ x/ 2. Thus, with probability at least 

1 − δ/ 2, we have 

Nt ≥ pmin (t − 1) 2 , ∀t ≥ t0. (S2) 

42 Next, we bound the minimum distance dt in each timestep. Without loss of generality, we consider timestep t with Nt ≥ 1. Then, according to Assumption 3, for any ε ∈ (0 , D ], we have 

P(dt > ε ) ≤ (1 − P (B (qt, ε ))) Nt ≤ (1 − C0εd0 )Nt ≤ exp( −C0Ntεd0 ),

where the last inequality is because ∀x ∈ (0 , 1) , 1−x ≤ e−x. After choosing εt = (log(2 T /δ )/C 0Nt)1/d 0 ,we have 

P(dt > ε t) ≤ δ

2T .

A union bound over t ∈ [T ] implies that with probability at least 1 − δ/ 2,

dt ≤ log  4Tδ



C0Nt

!1/d 0

, ∀t ∈ [T ] such that Nt ≥ 1. (S3) Now, we can derive the upper bound for accumulated coverage gap. By taking the intersection of events in Eq. (S2) and Eq. (S3), with probability at least 1 − δ, we have 

R∆ 

> T

=

> T

X

> t=1

[R(qt, a ⋆t ) − ¯R(qt, c ⋆t )] =

> t0

X

> t=1

[R(qt, a ⋆t ) − ¯R(qt, c ⋆t )] + 

> T

X

> t=t0

[R(qt, a ⋆t ) − ¯R(qt, c ⋆t )] 

≤ t0 +

> T

X

> t=t0+1

LQdt

≤ t0 +

> T

X

> t=t0+1

LQ

log  2Tδ



C0Nt

!1/d 0

≤ t0 +

> T

X

> t=t0+1

LQ

2 log  2Tδ



C0pmin (t − 1) 

!1/d 0

= t0 + LQ

2 log  2Tδ



C0pmin 

1/d 0 TX

> t=t0+1

(t − 1) −1/d 0 ,

where the first inequality is due to ∆t ≤ 1 and Eq. (S1), the second inequality is due to Eq. (S3), and the third inequality is due to Eq. (S2). 

Remark 1. From Theorem 4, the coverage gap exhibits different scaling behaviours depending on the intrinsic dimension parameter d0. If d0 > 1, we can derive ˜O(T d0−1 

> d0

) coverage gap bound; if 

0 < d 0 ≤ 1, we can derive ˜O(1) coverage gap bound. 

# E Neural-Linear Logistic Bandit: Neural-LinLogUCB 

In this section, we formally introduce the proposed neural logistic bandit algorithm in CASCADE and then analyse its regret. Without loss of generality, we present theoretical analyses based on 

43 the standard neural contextual bandit with binary feedback (NCBF) setting 72,77 . For clarity, we make a slight abuse of notation during the derivation of the regret bound for the Neural-LinLogUCB algorithm. This section can be regarded as self-contained and independent from the rest of the paper. 

## E.1 Preliminary 

Contextual Bandit with Binary Feedback. We consider the stochastic K-armed contextual bandit problem with binary feedback 78,79,80,72,77 , where the total number of timesteps T is known. At each timestep t ∈ [T ], the agent observes K feature vectors {xt,k ∈ Rd | k ∈ [K]} from the corresponding contextual information {xt,k | k ∈ [K]}. Then, the agent selects an action ct and receives a reward rt,c t ∈ { 0, 1}. We assume that the binary reward follows a Bernoulli distribution, where the probability of rt,c t = 1 is given by 

P{rt,c t = 1 | xt,c t } = σ(h(xt,c t )) , (S4) where h : Rd → R is an unknown latent reward function, and σ : R → [0 , 1] is the sigmoid function, i.e., σ(x) = 1 /(1+ e−x). We denote Lσ and κσ as the Lipschitz constant and the strong monotonicity constant of the sigmoid function, i,e., κσ ≤ ˙σ(·) ≤ Lσ. Note that we have Lσ ≤ 1/4 for the sigmoid function. The objective is to maximise the accumulated rewards, or equivalently minimising the following 

pseudo regret (or regret for short): 

RT = E

" TX

> t=1

(rt,c ⋆t − rt,c t )

#

=

> T

X

> t=1

[σ(h(x⋆t )) − σ(h(xt,c t ))] , (S5) where c⋆t = arg max c∈[K] E[rt,c ] denotes the optimal action at timestep t that maximises the expected reward, and x⋆t = xt,c ⋆t denotes the feature vector of the optimal action at timestep t.

Deep Neural Networks. We follow previous works on neural contextual bandits 37,73,72 to utilise the fully connected network with the ReLU activation function as the network architecture. Specifically, the neural network f (x; ω) with depth L ≥ 2 is defined as: 

f (x; ω) = √mϕ (WLϕ(WL−1 · · · ϕ(W1x))) , (S6) where ϕ(x) = max {0, x } is the ReLU activation function, W1 ∈ Rm×d, Wi ∈ Rm×m, 2 ≤ i ≤

L − 1, WL ∈ Rd×m, and ω = [ vec (W1)⊤, · · · , vec (WL)⊤]⊤ ∈ Rp with p = 2 md + m2(L − 2) .We denote the gradient of the neural network by g(x; ω) = ∇ωf (x; ω) ∈ Rd×p.

## E.2 Neural-Linear Logistic Bandit Algorithm 

Modelling Reward Function with Deep Representation Model and Shallow Linear Head. 

Although neural logistic bandit algorithms have shown powerful capabilities in approximating the complex reward function 37,72,77 , they are inefficient at estimating uncertainty due to the large number of parameters involved in the entire network. To this end, we follow previous works 81,82,73 

to decouple representation learning and uncertainty estimation, and propose the neural linear logistic upper confidence bound (Neural-LinLogUCB) algorithm. In particular, we model the reward function with a deep neural network model f (·; ω) for representation learning and a shallow linear head θ ∈ Rd for uncertainty estimation, i.e., h(x) = ⟨θ⋆, f (x; ω⋆)⟩, where θ⋆ and ω⋆ denote the unknown optimal parameters for linear head and neural network respectively. This decoupling 

44 enables the algorithm to benefit from both strong approximation capabilities of deep neural networks for representation learning and efficient exploration from the shallow linear head. 

Initialisation. We follow the standard initialisation scheme from neural contextual bandits 37,73,72,77 ,where each entry of ω follows an appropriate Gaussian distribution. Specifically, for any layer 

1 ≤ l ≤ L − 1, we set Wl =

W 00 W



, where the parameters in W is independently sampled from the Gaussian distribution N (0 , 4/m ); for the last layer L, we set WL = W⊤ −W⊤, where the parameters in W is independently sampled from the Gaussian distribution N (0 , 2/m ). For the linear head θ, we initialise its each entry by independently sampling from the Gaussian distribution 

N (0 , 1/d ).

Learning Algorithm. In timestep t, the agent observes a set of feature vectors Xt = {xt, 1, ..., xt,K }.Then, it selects the action that maximises the following upper confidence bound: 

ct = arg max 

> k∈[K]

n

⟨θt−1, f (xt,k ; ωt−1)⟩ + αt∥f (xt,k ; ωt−1)∥A−1

> t−1

o

, (S7) where {αt > 0}Tt=1 are exploration coefficients, and the matrix At is defined as 

At = λI +

> t

X

> s=1

f (xs,c s ; ωs−1)f (xs,c s ; ωs−1)⊤, (S8) where λ > 0 denotes the hyper-parameter of the regularization strength in linear head estimation. After selecting the action ct, the agent will receive a stochastic binary reward rt.Then, we utilise the current history data {(xs,c s , r s)}ts=1 to learn the neural network and linear head. First, we estimate the linear head by solving the the following logistic regression problem with L2 regularisation: 

min 

> θ∈Rd
> t

X

> s=1

−rs log σ  θ⊤f (xs,c s ; ωs−1) − (1 − rs) log  1 − σ  θ⊤f (xs,c s ; ωs−1) + λ

2 ∥θ∥22.

(S9) Then, we train the neural network by minimising the following cross-entropy loss function: 

Lt(ω) = 1

m

> t

X

> s=1

−rs log σ  θ⊤

> s−1

f (xs,c s ; ω) − (1 − rs) log  1 − σ  θ⊤

> s−1

f (xs,c s ; ω) +λ

2 ∥ω−ω0∥22.

(S10) We summarise the theoretical version of the algorithm in Algorithm 2. 

## E.3 Regret Analysis 

Now, we analyse the upper regret bound of the proposed algorithm Neural-LogUCB. Our regret analysis follows existing neural contextual bandit works 37,73,72 built upon the neural tangent kernel (NTK) matrix 83 .

Definition 1. Let {xi}T K i=1 be a set of feature vectors. Define 

˜Σ(1)  

> i,j

= Σ(1)  

> i,j

= ⟨xi, xj ⟩,

45 Algorithm 2 Neural-LinLogUCB algorithm (theoretical version).  

> 1:

Input: Number of rounds T , exploration parameters {αt > 0}t∈[T ], regularisation parameter λ,number of total timesteps T . 

> 2:

Initialisation: Initialise the parameters of neural network ω0 and the linear head θ0. Initialise the matrix A0 = λI. 

> 3:

for t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 4:

Observe the feature vectors Xt = {xt, 1, · · · , xt,K } 

> 5:

Choose arm ct = arg max k∈[K] θ⊤

> t−1

f (xt,k ; ωt−1) + αt∥f (xt,k ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1
> 6:

Observe the reward rt 

> 7:

Update θt by solving the logistic regression problem in Eq. (S9)  

> 8:

Train neural networks via gradient descent by minimising the loss function in Eq. (S10)  

> 9:

Update the matrix At as defined in Eq. (S8)  

> 10:

end for 

Λ(l) 

> i,j

=

"

Σ(l) 

> i,i

Σ(l)

> i,j

Σ(l) 

> j,i

Σ(l)

> j,j

#

,

Σ(l+1)  

> i,j

= 2 Eu,v ∼N (0 ,Λ(l) 

> i,j )

[ϕ(u)ϕ(v)] ,

˜Σ(l+1)  

> i,j

= 2 ˜Σ(l) 

> i,j

Eu,v ∼N (0 ,Λ(l) 

> i,j )

[ ˙ϕ(u) ˙ϕ(v)] + Σ(l) 

> i,j

.

Then, the neural tangent kernel matrix on this set of feature vectors is defined as 

H = ( ˜Σ(L) + Σ(L))/2.

Now, we introduce several necessary standard assumptions in neural contextual bandits 37,73,72,77 .

Assumption 4. ∀t ∈ [T ], ∀k ∈ [K], we assume that ∥xt,k ∥2 = 1 and each entry satisfies that 

[xt,k ]j = [ xt,k ]j+d/ 2.

The first assumption is quite mild: the first part is only introduced for convenience, while the second part can be easily satisfied if we construct a new feature vector x′ = ( x⊤, x⊤)⊤/√2. With this assumption, we can derive that the initialisation scheme above leads to f (xt,k ; ω0) = 0 for all 

t ∈ [T ], k ∈ [K].

Assumption 5. There exists a constant ℓLip > 0 such that for all x, x′ ∈ { xi}T K i=1 ,

∥∇ ωf (x; ω0) − ∇ ωf (x′; ω0)∥ ≤ ℓLip ∥x − x′∥2.

This assumption ensures the stability of the parameter gradients with respect to input variations, which can be satisfied when T K feature vectors lie in a certain subspace of Rd.

Assumption 6. The strong monotonicity constant is positive, i.e., κσ > 0.

Finally, we introduce the assumption on the NTK matrix as below. 

46 Assumption 7. The NTK matrix H is positive definite, i.e., there exists a constant λ0 > 0, such that 

H ⪰ λ0I.

This assumption is also widely introduced by existing works, which requires the NTK matrix to be non-singular. Now, we can present the regret bound of the proposed algorithm Neural-LinLogUCB. 

Theorem 5. Suppose Assumptions 4, 5, 6, 7 hold. Assume that ∥θ⋆∥2 ≤ M for some positive constant M > 0. For any δ ∈ (0 , 1) , choose αt in Neural-LinLogUCB as 

αt = 1

κσ



νp2( d log(1 + Lt 2/λ ) + log(1 /δ )) + √λM 



.

For m ≥ poly (L, d, 1/κ σ, L σ, log(1 /δ ), log( T K )) , with probability at least 1 − δ, we have 

RT ≤ C1

κσ

pT d log(1 + LT 2/λ 2)



νpd log(1 + LT 2/λ ) + log(1 /δ ) + √λM 



+ C2dκσ

plog(1 /δ )L∥h − ˜h∥H−1

·



m−1/6T 5/3pd log mλ −2/3L3 + ℓLip m−1/2T 3/2λ−1/2



,

where C1, C 2 > 0 are absolute constants, h =  h(x1), h (x2), · · · , h (xT K )⊤ ∈ RT K and ˜h =

 θ⊤ 

> 0

f (x1; ω0), · · · , θ⊤ 

> T−1

f (xT K ; ωT −1)⊤ ∈ RT K .

Remark 2. With the same conditions of Theorem 5, let B be a constant such that ∥h − ˜h∥H−1 ≤ B;if we choose a sufficiently wide neural network such that m ≥ T 7, the regret of Neural-LinLogUCB is RT = ˜O( Bκσ

√T ).

Comparison with Other Neural Contextual Bandits. The regret bound of the proposed Neural-LinLogUCB is worse than that of Neural-LinUCB 73 O(B√T ) with the additional dependency of 

κσ. The reason for this gap is analogous to why NCBF-UCB 72 achieves a worse regret bound than Neural-UCB 37 : both arise from the fundamental difference between binary feedback and continuous feedback settings. 

Practical Implementation of Neural-LinLogUCB in CASCADE. Due to the complexity of the natural-language context space, we adapt the theoretical Neural-LinLogUCB framework in CASCADE and introduce several modifications for practical implementation. Firstly, to derive the feature vectors x from the context information x (i.e., the concatenation of the query and the case), one may apply a pretrained embedding model to convert the discrete natural language into continuous vector representation. However, prior work in the information retrieval community 84 has shown that learning complex interactions via MLPs on top of such frozen embeddings can be challenging, particularly in online learning settings. Thus, we replace the MLPs in Neural-LinLogUCB by a Transformer-based encoder model that is initialised from 

gte-reranker-modernbert-base 64 to benefit from its complex interaction modelling capabilities and good pretrained representations. Meanwhile, we initialise the linear head θ with the last layer of 

gte-reranker-modernbert-base , ensuring that the initial behaviour of the reward model aligns with that of the pretrained reranker model. 

> 47

Secondly, Neural-LinLogUCB requires updating both the linear head and the deep neural network at every timestep, which can be computationally expensive. To mitigate this overhead, we apply stochastic gradient descent to update the linear head at each step, serving as a computationally efficient approximation to solving the full logistic regression problem. For the encoder, we further reduce the cost by performing only a single-step mini-batch gradient descent update every H

timesteps, which maintains efficiency while still allowing the model to adapt over time. These modifications enable Neural-LinLogUCB a practical contextual bandit solution for learning the retriever model in the case-based reasoning framework. 

## E.4 Proof of the Main Results 

In this subsection, we provide the proof of the regret bound for Neural-LinLogUCB, which basically leverages the techniques from previous neural contextual bandits 37,73,72 . Firstly, we present several useful lemmas from them. 

Lemma 1 (Lemma C.1 from Xu et al. 73 ). There exists ω⋆ ∈ Rp such that √m∥ω⋆ − ω(0) ∥2 ≤q

(h − ˜h)⊤H−1(h − ˜h) ≤ B and it holds that 

h(xt,k ) = θ⋆⊤f (xt,k ; ωt−1) + θ⊤ 

> 0

g(xt,k ; ω0)( ω⋆ − ω0),

for all k ∈ [K] and t ∈ [T ].

Lemma 1 implies that the reward function at points x can be approximated by a linear function around the initial parameter ω0.The next lemma show the upper bound on the distance between ωt and ω0.

Lemma 2 (Lemma 3 from Verma et al. 72 ). We have that ∥ωt − ω0∥2 ≤ pt/ (mλ ), ∀t ∈ [T ].

With Lemma 2, we can derive the following lemmas regarding the gradients of the neural networks. 

Lemma 3 (Lemma 4 from Verma et al. 72 , Lemma B.5 and Lemma B.6 from Zhou et al. 37 ). Let 

τ ≜ 2pt/ (mλ ). There exists constants C1, C 2 > 0 such that with probability of at least 1 − δ,

∥g(x; ωt)∥F ≤ C1

√mLd, 

∥g(x; ω0) − g(x; ωt)∥F ≤ C2

pmd log mτ 1/3L7/2 = C2m1/3pd log m

 tλ

1/6

L7/2,

for any x ∈ { xi}T K i=1 .

Furthermore, we have the following lemma to bound the distance between the output of neural network and its linearisation. 

Lemma 4 (Lemma C.3 from Xu et al. 73 , Lemma 5 from Verma et al. 72 , Lemma B.4 from Zhou et al. 37 ). Let τ ≜ 2pt/ (mλ ). There exists constants C3 > 0 such that with probability of at least 

1 − δ,

∥f (x; ωt) − g(x; ω0)( ωt − ω0)∥2 ≤ C3τ 4/3L3pdm log m = C3m−1/6pd log m

 tλ

2/3

L3,

for any x ∈ { xi}T K i=1 .

48 In addition, we can derive the following lemma regarding the bound of the learned representation vectors. 

Lemma 5. There exists constants C3 > 0 such that with probability of at least 1 − δ,

∥f (x; ωt)∥2 ≤ C3

pLdt/λ, 

for any x ∈ { xi}T K i=1 .Proof. 

∥f (x; ωt)∥2 = ∥f (x; ωt) − g(x; ω0)( ωt − ω0) + g(x; ω0)( ωt − ω0)∥2

≤ ∥ f (x; ωt) − g(x; ω0)( ωt − ω0)∥2 + ∥g(x; ω0)( ωt − ω0)∥2

≤ ∥ f (x; ωt) − g(x; ω0)( ωt − ω0)∥2 + ∥g(x; ω0)∥F · ∥ ωt − ω0∥2

≤ C3m−1/6pd log m

 tλ

2/3

L3 + C1

√mLd pt/ (mλ )

≤ C3

pLdt/λ, 

where the first inequality is due to triangle inequality, the second inequality is due to Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, the third inequality comes from Lemma 4, Lemma 3 and Lemma 2, and the last inequality can be achieved by a large enough m.Next, we introduce several lemmas related to the matrix At.

Lemma 6 (Lemma C.6 in Xu et al. 73 , Lemma 10 and Lemma 11 from Abbasi-Yadkori et al. 85 ). Let 

{xt}∞ 

> t=1

be a sequence in Rd and λ > 0. Suppose ∥xt∥2 ≤ G and λ ≥ max {1, G 2} for some G > 0,Let At = λI + Pts=1 xtx⊤ 

> t

. Then, we have 

det( At) ≤ (λ + tG 2/d )d,

> T

X

> t=1

∥xt∥2

> A−1
> t−1

≤ 2 log det AT

det λI ≤ 2d log(1 + T G 2/(λd )) .

Lemma 7 (Theorem 1 in Abbasi-Yadkori et al. 33 ). Let {ξt}∞ 

> t=1

be a real-valued stochastic process and {xt}∞ 

> t=1

be a stochastic process in Rd. Let Ft = σ(x1, · · · , xt+1 , ξ 1, · · · , ξ t) be a σ-algebra, such that xt and ξt are Ft−1-measurable. Let At = λI + Pts=1 xtx⊤ 

> t

for some constant λ > 0

and st = PTt=1 ξtxt. If ξt is ν-sub-Gaussian conditioned on Ft−1, then for any η ∈ (0 , 1) , with probability at least 1 − δ, we have 

∥st∥2

> A−1
> t

≤ 2ν2 log det( At)1/2 det( λI)−1/2

δ .

Lemma 8 (Lemma C.5 from Verma et al. 73 ). Assume that At = λI + Pts=1 ϕsϕ⊤ 

> s

, where ϕ ∈ Rd

and for λ, G > 0, ∥ϕs∥2 ≤ G, ∀s ∈ [t]. Let {ζt}t=1 ,··· be a real-value sequence such that |ζt| ≤ U

for some constant U > 0. Then, we have 

A−1

> tt

X

> s=1

ϕsζs 2

≤ 2U d, ∀t = 1 , 2, · · · 

49 Now, we start the proof by deriving the confidence bound of the estimated θt. Different from LinUCB 33 to directly bound ∥θt − θ⋆∥At , we need to consider the bias caused by representation learning via the deep neural networks. Otherwise, we would derive the linear regret bound. Specifically, let zs = f (xs,c s ; ωs−1) ∈ Rd be the representation vectors at timestep s, and we have 

At = λI + Pts=1 zsz⊤ 

> s

. By Lemma 1, the underlying reward function can be rewritten as 

h(xt,k ) = θ⋆⊤f (xt,k ; ωt−1) + θ⊤ 

> 0

g(xt,k ; ω0)( ω⋆ − ω0).

For brevity, let bs = b(xs,c s ) = θ⊤ 

> 0

g(xs,c s ; ω0)( ω⋆ − ω0) denote the bias induced by the mismatch between the learned and true representation parameters, and δs = σ θ⋆⊤zs + bs

 − σ θ⋆⊤zs

 as the corresponding bias after applying the sigmoid function. According to Algorithm 2, we solve the regularised logistic regression loss at each timestep t as: 

ℓt(θ) = 

> t

X

> s=1

−rs log σ  θ⊤zs

 − (1 − rs) log  1 − σ  θ⊤zs

 + λ

2 ∥θ∥22.

We derive the estimator of θt as the minimiser of the loss function above, i.e., θt = arg min θ∈Rd ℓt(θ),where the optimality condition is ∇θℓt(θ) = 0, i.e., 

λθt +

> t

X

> s=1



σ(θ⊤ 

> t

zs) − rs



zs = 0.

Let ϵs be the observation noise in timestep s, i.e., 

rs = σ(θ⋆⊤zs + bs) + ϵs = σ(θ⋆⊤zs) + δs + ϵs.

Let λ′ ∈ (0 , 1) , and let ξt,s = λ′θ⊤ 

> t

zs + (1 − λ′)θ⋆⊤zs. Then, according to the mean-value theorem, we have for some λ′ that 

σ(θ⊤ 

> t

zs) − σ(θ⋆⊤zs) = ˙ σ(ξt,s )z⊤ 

> s

(θt − θ⋆),

where κσ ≤ ˙σ(ξt,s ) ≤ Lσ. This allows us to show that 

 λI + bAt

(θt − θ⋆) = 

> t

X

> s=1

ϵszs +

> t

X

> s=1

δszs − λθ⋆, (S11) where the matrix bAt is defined as: 

bAt =

> t

X

> s=1

˙σ(ξt,s )zsz⊤ 

> s

.

Then, we define the bias term as bt = ( λI + bAt)−1 Pts=1 δszs, and introduce the following bias-corrected confidence bound. 

Lemma 9. For any δ ∈ (0 , 1) , with probability at least 1 − δ, the distance between the estimated θt

and θ⋆ can be bounded as follows: 

θt − θ⋆ − bt At ≤ 1

κσ



νp2( d log(1 + Lt 2/λ ) + log(1 /δ )) + √λM 



. (S12) 

50 Proof. We first show that λI + bAt is spectrally sandwiched between κσAt and At. Specifically, by the definition of strong monotonicity constant of sigmoid function, i.e., κσ ≤ ˙σ(·) ≤ 1, we have 

λI + bAt ⪰ λI + κσtX

> s=1

zsz⊤ 

> s

⪰ κσ

 λI +

> t

X

> s=1

zsz⊤

> s

 = κσAt.

Also, since bAt ⪯ Pts=1 zsz⊤ 

> s

= At − λI, we have 

λI + bAt ⪯ λI + ( At − λI) = At.

Combining both, we can derive that 

κσAt ⪯ λI + bAt ⪯ At. (S13) Then, we use the definition of bt to rewrite Eq. (S11) as: 

θt − θ⋆ − bt = ( λI + bAt)−1

 tX

> s=1

ϵszs − λθ⋆



. (S14) Now, we can bound the norm as below: 

∥θt − θ⋆ − bt∥At

= ∥(λI + bAt)−1

 tX

> s=1

ϵszs − λθ⋆



∥At

=

vuut tX

> s=1

ϵszs − λθ⋆

⊤

(λI + bAt)−1/2(λI + bAt)−1/2At(λI + bAt)−1/2(λI + bAt)−1/2

 tX

> s=1

ϵszs − λθ⋆



≤

vuut 1

κσ

 tX

> s=1

ϵszs − λθ⋆

⊤

(λI + bAt)−1

 tX

> s=1

ϵszs − λθ⋆



= 1

√κσ

> t

X

> s=1

ϵszs − λθ⋆ 

> (λI+bAt)−1

≤ 1

√κσ

 tX

> s=1

ϵszs (λI+ bAt)−1

+ λθ⋆ 

> (λI+bAt)−1



≤ 1

√κσ

 1

√κσ

> t

X

> s=1

ϵszs A−1

> t

+ λθ⋆ 

> (λI+bAt)−1



≤ 1

κσ

> t

X

> s=1

ϵszs A−1

> t

+

r λκσ

∥θ⋆∥2, (S15) where the first inequality is due to λI + bAt ⪯ At in Eq. (S13), the second inequality is due to the triangle inequality, the third inequality is due to κσAt ⪯ λI + bAt in Eq. (S13), the fourth inequality is due to λI + bAt ⪰ λI.

51 Now, we can apply Lemma 7 to bound the first term, and the fact that ∥θ⋆∥2 ≤ M to bound the second term in Eq. (S15). As such, we further have 

∥θt − θ⋆ − bt∥At ≤ 1

κσ



ν

r

2 log det( At)1/2 det( λI)−1/2

δ + √λM 



≤ 1

κσ



νp2( d log(1 + Lt 2/λ ) + log(1 /δ )) + √λM 



,

where we apply Lemma 5 and Lemma 6 for the last inequality. Now we are ready to prove the regret bound of Algorithm 2. 

Proof of Theorem 5. We first apply Lemma 1 to decompose the instantaneous latent reward gap into different parts and bound them individually. Specifically, there exists ω⋆ ∈ Rp such that 

h(xt,c ⋆t ) − h(xt,c t )= θ⊤ 

> 0

[g(xt,c ⋆t ; ω0) − g(xt,c t ; ω0)]( ω⋆ − ω0) + θ⋆⊤[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] = θ⊤ 

> 0

[g(xt,c ⋆t ; ω0) − g(xt,c t ; ω0)]( ω⋆ − ω0)+ θ⊤

> t−1

[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] 

− (θt−1 − θ⋆)⊤[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] . (S16) Now, we upper bound these three terms. We bound the first term as below: 

θ⊤ 

> 0

[g(xt,c ⋆t ; ω0) − g(xt,c t ; ω0)]( ω⋆ − ω0)

≤ ∥ θ0∥2 · ∥ g(xt,c ⋆t ; ω0) − g(xt,c t ; ω0)∥F · ∥ ω⋆ − ω0∥2

≤ ℓLip ∥θ0∥2 · ∥ xt,c ⋆t − xt,c t ∥2 · ∥ ω⋆ − ω0∥2

≤ ℓLip · 2(2 + pd−1 log(1 /δ )) · 2 ·

q

(h − ˜h)⊤H−1(h − ˜h)/m 

≤ C4ℓLip m−1/2

q

d−1 log(1 /δ )( h − ˜h)⊤H−1(h − ˜h), (S17) where C4 > 0 is the absolute constant, the first inequality is due to Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, the second inequality is due to Assumption 5. For the third inequality, we bound ∥θ0∥ based on its initialisation scheme, bound ∥xt,c ⋆t − xt,c t ∥2 due to Assumption 4, and bound ∥ω⋆ − ω0∥2 due to Lemma 1. For the second term, we use the definition of the upper confidence bound in Algorithm 2, i.e., 

θ⊤

> t−1

f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1)+ αt∥f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1

≤ θ⊤

> t−1

f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)+ αt∥f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1

, to derive the following upper bound: 

θ⊤

> t−1

[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] ≤ αt∥f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1

− αt∥f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1

, (S18) where αt is the upper bound derived from Lemma 9. 

52 The last term can be bounded as below. 

− (θt−1 − θ⋆)⊤[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] = −(θt−1 − θ⋆ − bt−1)⊤[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] 

− b⊤

> t−1

[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] 

≤ ∥ θt−1 − θ⋆ − bt−1∥At−1 · ∥ f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1)∥A−1

> t−1

+ ∥θt−1 − θ⋆ − bt−1∥At−1 · ∥ f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥A−1

> t−1

+ ∥bt−1∥2 · ∥ f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥2

≤ αt∥f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1

+ αt∥f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥A−1

> t−1

+ ∥bt−1∥2 · ∥ f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥2, (S19) where the first inequality is due to the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, and the second inequality is due to Lemma 9. Summarising Eq. (S18) and Eq. (S19), we can derive that 

θ⊤

> t−1

[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] − (θt−1 − θ⋆)⊤[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] 

≤ 2αt∥f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1

+ ∥bt−1∥2 · ∥ f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥2. (S20) Now, we aim to further bound the second term in Eq. (S20). We first bound ∥bt−1∥2. To apply Lemma 8, we bound the |δs| as below: 

|δs| = |σ(θ⋆⊤zs + bs) − σ(θ⋆⊤zs)|≤ Lσ|bs|

= Lσ|θ⊤ 

> 0

g(xs,c s ; ω0)( ω⋆ − ω0)|≤ Lσ∥θ0∥2 · ∥ g(xs,c s ; ω0)∥F · ∥ ω⋆ − ω0∥2

≤ Lσ · 2(2 + pd−1 log(1 /δ )) · C1

√mLd ·

q

(h − ˜h)⊤H−1(h − ˜h)/m 

≤ C5Lσ

q

log(1 /δ )L(h − ˜h)⊤H−1(h − ˜h), (S21) where C5 > 0 is an absolute constant, the first inequality is due to the definition of Lipschitz constant 

Lσ, the second inequality is due to triangle inequality, the third inequality is due to the initialisation scheme of θ0, Lemma 1 and Lemma 3. Then, we can derive that 

∥bt−1∥2 = ∥(λI + bAt−1)−1  t−1X

> s=1

δszs

∥2

≤ 1

κσ

∥A−1

> t−1

  t−1X

> s=1

δszs

∥2

≤ 2C5Lσdκσ

q

log(1 /δ )L(h − ˜h)⊤H−1(h − ˜h), (S22) where the first inequality is due to the fact that λI + bAt−1 ⪰ κσAt−1, the second inequality is due to Lemma 8. 

53 Next, we bound ∥f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥2 via Lemma 4: 

∥f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥2

= f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − g(xt,c ⋆t ; ω0)( ωt−1 − ω0) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1) + g(xt,c t ; ω0)( ωt−1 − ω0)+ ( g(xt,c t ; ω0) − g(xt,c ⋆t ; ω0))( ωt−1 − ω0) 2

≤ ∥ f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − g(xt,c ⋆t ; ω0)( ωt−1 − ω0)∥2 + ∥f (xt,c t ; ωt−1) − g(xt,c t ; ω0)( ωt−1 − ω0)∥2

+ ∥g(xt,c t ; ω0) − g(xt,c ⋆t ; ω0)∥F · ∥ ωt−1 − ω0∥2

≤ 2C3m−1/6pd log m

 tλ

2/3

L3 + 2 ℓLip 

pt/ (mλ ), (S23) where the first inequality is due to triangle inequality, the second inequality is due to Lemma 4, Assumption 5, and Lemma 2. Plugging Eq. (S22) and Eq. (S23) back into Eq. (S20) yields 

θ⊤

> t−1

[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] − (θt−1 − θ⋆)⊤[f (xt,c ⋆t ; ωt−1) − f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)] 

≤ 2αt∥f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1

+ 2C5Lσdκσ

q

log(1 /δ )L(h − ˜h)⊤H−1(h − ˜h)

·



2C3m−1/6pd log m

 tλ

2/3

L3 + 2 ℓLip 

pt/ (mλ )



. (S24) Now, we can derive the upper bound of the instantaneous latent reward gap as: 

h(xt,c ⋆t ) − h(xt,c t )

≤ 2αt∥f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥A−1 

> t−1

+ C4ℓLip m−1/2

q

d−1 log(1 /δ )( h − ˜h)⊤H−1(h − ˜h)+ 2C5Lσdκσ

q

log(1 /δ )L(h − ˜h)⊤H−1(h − ˜h)

·



2C3m−1/6pd log m

 tλ

2/3

L3 + 2 ℓLip 

pt/ (mλ )



. (S25) 

54 Therefore, the regret of Neural-LinLogUCB can be bounded as: 

RT =

> T

X

> t=1

 σ(h(xt,c ⋆t )) − σ(h(xt,c t )) 

≤

> T

X

> t=1

Lσ|h(xt,c ⋆t ) − h(xt,c t )|≤

vuutT max   

> t∈[T]

α2

> tT

X

> t=1

∥f (xt,c t ; ωt−1)∥2

> A−1
> t−1

+ C4ℓLip m−1/2T pd−1 log(1 /δ )∥h − ˜h∥H−1

+ 2C5Lσdκσ

plog(1 /δ )L∥h − ˜h∥H−1

·



2C3m−1/6T 5/3pd log mλ −2/3L3 + 2 ℓLip m−1/2T 3/2λ−1/2



≤ C6

κσ

pT d log(1 + LT 2/λ 2)



νpd log(1 + LT 2/λ ) + log(1 /δ ) + √λM 



+ C7dκσ

plog(1 /δ )L∥h − ˜h∥H−1

·



m−1/6T 5/3pd log mλ −2/3L3 + ℓLip m−1/2T 3/2λ−1/2



,

(S26) where the first inequality is due to the definition of Lipschitz constant, the second inequality is due to Cauchy’s inequality, the third inequality comes from the fact that max t∈[T ] αt = αT , Lemma 5 and Lemma 6, C6, C 7 > 0 are absolute constants independent of other parameters. 

55 References for Supplementary Notes 

1. David Silver and Richard S. Sutton. Welcome to the era of experience, 2025. URL https: //storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/Era-of-Experience%20/The%20Era%2 0of%20Experience%20Paper.pdf .2. Guibin Zhang, Hejia Geng, Xiaohang Yu, Zhenfei Yin, Zaibin Zhang, Zelin Tan, Heng Zhou, Zhongzhi Li, Xiangyuan Xue, Yijiang Li, Yifan Zhou, Yang Chen, Chen Zhang, Yutao Fan, Zihu Wang, Songtao Huang, Francisco Piedrahita-Velez, Yue Liao, Hongru Wang, Mengyue Yang, Heng Ji, Jun Wang, Shuicheng Yan, Philip Torr, and Lei Bai. The landscape of agentic reinforcement learning for llms: A survey, 2025. 3. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. 4. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. 5. Lang Feng, Zhenghai Xue, Tingcong Liu, and Bo An. Group-in-group policy optimization for llm agent training. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. 6. Kai Zhang, Xiangchao Chen, Bo Liu, Tianci Xue, Zeyi Liao, Zhihan Liu, Xiyao Wang, Yuting Ning, Zhaorun Chen, Xiaohan Fu, et al. Agent learning via early experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08558 , 2025. 7. Zichen Liu, Anya Sims, Keyu Duan, Changyu Chen, Simon Yu, Xiangxin Zhou, Haotian Xu, Shaopan Xiong, Bo Liu, Chenmien Tan, et al. Gem: A gym for agentic llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01051 , 2025. 8. Lingrui Mei, Jiayu Yao, Yuyao Ge, Yiwei Wang, Baolong Bi, Yujun Cai, Jiazhi Liu, Mingyu Li, Zhong-Zhi Li, Duzhen Zhang, Chenlin Zhou, Jiayi Mao, Tianze Xia, Jiafeng Guo, and Shenghua Liu. A survey of context engineering for large language models, 2025. 9. Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Pan Lu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. Optimizing generative ai by backpropagating language model feedback. Nature , 639(8055):609–616, 2025. 10. Yoonho Lee, Joseph Boen, and Chelsea Finn. Feedback descent: Open-ended text optimization via pairwise comparison. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.07919 , 2025. 11. Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan A, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into state-of-the-art pipelines. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. 12. Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alex Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. GEPA: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. 

> 56

13. Giovanni Monea, Antoine Bosselut, Kianté Brantley, and Yoav Artzi. Llms are in-context bandit reinforcement learners. In Second Conference on Language Modeling , 2025. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=c0RsezY2D1 .14. Xiangru Tang, Tianrui Qin, Tianhao Peng, Ziyang Zhou, Daniel Shao, Tingting Du, Xinming Wei, Peng Xia, Fang Wu, He Zhu, et al. Agent kb: Leveraging cross-domain experience for agentic problem solving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06229 , 2025. 15. Huichi Zhou, Yihang Chen, Siyuan Guo, Xue Yan, Kin Hei Lee, Zihan Wang, Ka Yiu Lee, Guchun Zhang, Kun Shao, Linyi Yang, and Jun Wang. Memento: Fine-tuning llm agents without fine-tuning llms. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2508.16153 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.or g/abs/2508.16153 .16. Zhicheng Cai, Xinyuan Guo, Yu Pei, JiangTao Feng, Jiangjie Chen, Ya-Qin Zhang, Wei-Ying Ma, Mingxuan Wang, and Hao Zhou. Flex: Continuous agent evolution via forward learning from experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.06449 , 2025. 17. Mirac Suzgun, Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. Dynamic cheatsheet: Test-time learning with adaptive memory. In Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7080–7106, 2026. 18. Qizheng Zhang, Changran Hu, Shubhangi Upasani, Boyuan Ma, Fenglu Hong, Vamsidhar Kamanuru, Jay Rainton, Chen Wu, Mengmeng Ji, Hanchen Li, et al. Agentic context engineering: Learning comprehensive contexts for self-improving language models. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. 19. Janet L Kolodner. An introduction to case-based reasoning. Artificial intelligence review , 6(1): 3–34, 1992. 20. Ian Watson and Farhi Marir. Case-based reasoning: A review. The knowledge engineering review , 9(4):327–354, 1994. 21. Agnar Aamodt and Enric Plaza. Case-based reasoning: Foundational issues, methodological variations, and system approaches. AI communications , 7(1):39–59, 1994. 22. Kerstin Bach, Ralph Bergmann, Florian Brand, Marta Caro-Martínez, Viktor Eisenstadt, Michael W. Floyd, Lasal Jayawardena, David Leake, Mirko Lenz, Lukas Malburg, David H. Ménager, Mirjam Minor, Brian Schack, Ian Watson, Kaitlynne Wilkerson, and Nirmalie Wiratunga. Case-based reasoning meets large language models: A research manifesto for open challenges and research directions. Working paper or preprint, March 2025. URL https://hal.science/ha l-05006761 .23. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. 24. Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Jingyuan Ma, Rui Li, Heming Xia, Jingjing Xu, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, et al. A survey on in-context learning. In Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 1107–1128, 2024. 25. Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2206–2240. PMLR, 2022. 

> 57

26. Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yixin Dai, Jiawei Sun, Haofen Wang, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 , 2(1), 2023. 27. Siyuan Guo, Cheng Deng, Ying Wen, Hechang Chen, Yi Chang, and Jun Wang. Ds-agent: Automated data science by empowering large language models with case-based reasoning. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 16813–16848. PMLR, 2024. 28. Siyuan Guo, Huiwu Liu, Xiaolong Chen, Yuming Xie, Liang Zhang, Tao Han, Hechang Chen, Yi Chang, and Jun Wang. Optimizing case-based reasoning system for functional test script generation with large language models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 2 , pages 4487–4498, 2025. 29. Guangyi Liu, Yongqi Zhang, Xunyuan Liu, and Quanming Yao. Case-based reasoning enhances the predictive power of llms in drug-drug interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23034 , 2025. 30. Jun Wang. Memento-ii: Learning by stateful reflective memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22716 , 2025. 31. Huichi Zhou, Siyuan Guo, Anjie Liu, Zhongwei Yu, Ziqin Gong, Bowen Zhao, Zhixun Chen, Menglong Zhang, Yihang Chen, Jinsong Li, et al. Memento-skills: Let agents design agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18743 , 2026. 32. Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 33. Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web , pages 661–670, 2010. 34. Zheqing Zhu and Benjamin Van Roy. Scalable neural contextual bandit for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , pages 3636–3646, 2023. 35. Yikun Ban, Yunzhe Qi, and Jingrui He. Neural contextual bandits for personalized recommendation. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , pages 1246– 1249, 2024. 36. Xiaoqiang Lin, Zhaoxuan Wu, Zhongxiang Dai, Wenyang Hu, Yao Shu, See-Kiong Ng, Patrick Jaillet, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Use your instinct: Instruction optimization for llms using neural bandits coupled with transformers. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 30317–30345. PMLR, 2024. 37. Dongruo Zhou, Lihong Li, and Quanquan Gu. Neural contextual bandits with ucb-based exploration. In International conference on machine learning , pages 11492–11502. PMLR, 2020. 38. Zhaoxuan Wu, Xiaoqiang Lin, Zhongxiang Dai, Wenyang Hu, Yao Shu, See-Kiong Ng, Patrick Jaillet, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Prompt optimization with ease? efficient ordering-aware automated selection of exemplars. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 122706–122740, 2024. 39. Pranoy Panda, Raghav Magazine, Chaitanya Devaguptapu, Sho Takemori, and Vishal Sharma. Adaptive llm routing under budget constraints. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 23934–23949, 2025. 

> 58

40. Manhin Poon, XiangXiang Dai, Xutong Liu, Fang Kong, John Lui, and Jinhang Zuo. Online multi-llm selection via contextual bandits under unstructured context evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.17670 , 2025. 41. Arsene Fansi Tchango, Rishab Goel, Zhi Wen, Julien Martel, and Joumana Ghosn. Ddxplus: A new dataset for automatic medical diagnosis. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:31306–31318, 2022. 42. Cheng-Kuang Wu, Zhi Rui Tam, Chieh-Yen Lin, Yun-Nung Vivian Chen, and Hung-yi Lee. Streambench: Towards benchmarking continuous improvement of language agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:107039–107063, 2024. 43. Alistair EW Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Lu Shen, Alvin Gayles, Ayad Shammout, Steven Horng, Tom J Pollard, Sicheng Hao, Benjamin Moody, Brian Gow, et al. Mimic-iv, a freely accessible electronic health record dataset. Scientific data , 10(1):1, 2023. 44. Qidong Liu, Xian Wu, Xiangyu Zhao, Yuanshao Zhu, Zijian Zhang, Feng Tian, and Yefeng Zheng. Large language model distilling medication recommendation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02803 , 2024. 45. Farieda Gaber, Maqsood Shaik, Fabio Allega, Agnes Julia Bilecz, Felix Busch, Kelsey Goon, Vedran Franke, and Altuna Akalin. Evaluating large language model workflows in clinical decision support for triage and referral and diagnosis. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):263, 2025. 46. Nicki Gilboy, Paula Tanabe, Debbie Travers, Alexander M Rosenau, et al. Emergency severity index (esi): a triage tool for emergency department care, version 4. Implementation handbook ,2012:12–0014, 2012. 47. Xiao Wei, Qi Xu, Hang Yu, Qian Liu, and Erik Cambria. Through the mud: A multi-defendant charge prediction benchmark with linked crime elements. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2864–2878, 2024. 48. Wanhong Huang, Yi Feng, Chuanyi Li, Honghan Wu, Jidong Ge, and Vincent Ng. Cmdl: A large-scale chinese multi-defendant legal judgment prediction dataset. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 5895–5906. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. 49. Iñigo Casanueva, Tadas Temˇ cinas, Daniela Gerz, Matthew Henderson, and Ivan Vuli´ c. Efficient intent detection with dual sentence encoders. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Conversational AI , pages 38–45, 2020. 50. Ankur Sinha, Satishwar Kedas, Rishu Kumar, and Pekka Malo. Sentfin 1.0: Entity-aware sentiment analysis for financial news. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 73(9):1314–1335, 2022. 51. Lipeng Ma, Yixuan Li, Weidong Yang, Mingjie Zhou, Xinyi Liu, Ben Fei, Shuhao Li, Xiaoyan Sun, Sihang Jiang, and Yanghua Xiao. Logreasoner: Empowering llms with expert-like coarse-to-fine reasoning for log analysis tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20798 , 2025. 52. Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li, Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, et al. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3911–3921, 2018. 

> 59

53. Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, et al. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:42330–42357, 2023. 54. Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=0IOX0YcCdTn .55. Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Scienceworld: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11279–11298, 2022. 56. Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. Constructing a multi-hop QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 6609–6625, 2020. 57. Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyumanshan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu. DeepResearcher: Scaling deep research via reinforcement learning in real-world environments. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 414–431, 2025. 58. Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data , 3(1):1–9, 2016. 59. Gyubok Lee, Hyeonji Hwang, Seongsu Bae, Yeonsu Kwon, Woncheol Shin, Seongjun Yang, Minjoon Seo, Jong-Yeup Kim, and Edward Choi. Ehrsql: A practical text-to-sql benchmark for electronic health records. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:15589–15601, 2022. 60. Wenqi Shi, Ran Xu, Yuchen Zhuang, Yue Yu, Jieyu Zhang, Hang Wu, Yuanda Zhu, Joyce C Ho, Carl Yang, and May Dongmei Wang. Ehragent: Code empowers large language models for few-shot complex tabular reasoning on electronic health records. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 22315–22339, 2024. 61. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. 62. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , 2023. 63. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. 64. Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Wen Xie, Ziqi Dai, Jialong Tang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, et al. mgte: Generalized long-context text representation and reranking models for multilingual text retrieval. In Proceedings of the 

> 60

2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 1393–1412, 2024. 65. Zehan Li, Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Pengjun Xie, and Meishan Zhang. Towards general text embeddings with multi-stage contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03281 , 2023. 66. Benjamin Warner, Antoine Chaffin, Benjamin Clavié, Orion Weller, Oskar Hallström, Said Taghadouini, Alexis Gallagher, Raja Biswas, Faisal Ladhak, Tom Aarsen, et al. Smarter, better, faster, longer: A modern bidirectional encoder for fast, memory efficient, and long context finetuning and inference. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2526–2547, 2025. 67. Jacob Jackson, Phillip Kravtsov, and Shomil Jain. Improving cursor tab with online rl, sep 2025. URL https://cursor.com/blog/tab-rl . Accessed: 2025-10-30. 68. John Schulman and Thinking Machines Lab. Lora without regret. Thinking Machines Lab: Connectionism , 2025. doi: 10.64434/tml.20250929. https://thinkingmachines.ai/blog/lora/. 69. Shuai Li, Alexandros Karatzoglou, and Claudio Gentile. Collaborative filtering bandits. In 

Proceedings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 539–548, 2016. 70. Yunzhe Qi, Yikun Ban, and Jingrui He. Neural bandit with arm group graph. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 1379–1389, 2022. 71. Lihong Li, Yu Lu, and Dengyong Zhou. Provably optimal algorithms for generalized linear contextual bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2071–2080. PMLR, 2017. 72. Arun Verma, Zhongxiang Dai, Xiaoqiang Lin, Patrick Jaillet, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Neural dueling bandits: Preference-based optimization with human feedback. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 73. Pan Xu, Zheng Wen, Handong Zhao, and Quanquan Gu. Neural contextual bandits with deep representation and shallow exploration. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. 74. Taehyun Hwang, Kyuwook Chai, and Min-hwan Oh. Combinatorial neural bandits. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 14203–14236. PMLR, 2023. 75. Yizao Wang, Jean-Yves Audibert, and Rémi Munos. Algorithms for infinitely many-armed bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 21, 2008. 76. Rémi Munos et al. From bandits to monte-carlo tree search: The optimistic principle applied to optimization and planning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning , 7(1):1–129, 2014. 77. Seoungbin Bae and Dabeen Lee. Neural logistic bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02069 ,2025. 78. Sarah Filippi, Olivier Cappe, Aurélien Garivier, and Csaba Szepesvári. Parametric bandits: The generalized linear case. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 23, 2010. 79. Lihong Li, Yu Lu, and Dengyong Zhou. Provably optimal algorithms for generalized linear contextual bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2071–2080. PMLR, 2017. 

> 61

80. Louis Faury, Marc Abeille, Clément Calauzènes, and Olivier Fercoq. Improved optimistic algorithms for logistic bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3052–3060. PMLR, 2020. 81. Carlos Riquelme, George Tucker, and Jasper Snoek. Deep bayesian bandits showdown: An empirical comparison of bayesian deep networks for thompson sampling. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. 82. Tom Zahavy and Shie Mannor. Deep neural linear bandits: Overcoming catastrophic forgetting through likelihood matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08612 , 2019. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/1901.08612 .83. Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and generalization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. 84. Sean MacAvaney, Andrew Yates, Arman Cohan, and Nazli Goharian. Cedr: Contextualized embeddings for document ranking. In Proceedings of the 42nd international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval , pages 1101–1104, 2019. 85. Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems , 24, 2011.