Title: Dissecting Bug Triggers and Failure Modes in Modern Agentic Frameworks: An Empirical Study

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.08906v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Apr 2026 00:23:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Dissecting Bug Triggers and Failure Modes in Modern Agentic Frameworks: An Empirical Study 

# Xiaowen Zhang 

Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada xiaowen.zhang@mail.concordia.ca 

# Hannuo Zhang 

Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada hannuo.zhang@mail.concordia.ca 

# Shin Hwei Tan 

Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada shinhwei.tan@concordia.ca 

## Abstract 

Modern agentic frameworks (e.g., CrewAI and AutoGen) have evolved into complex, autonomous multi-agent systems, introduc-ing unique reliability challenges beyond earlier pipeline-based LLM libraries. However, existing empirical studies focus on earlier LLM libraries or task-level bugs, leaving the unique complexities of these agentic frameworks unexplored. We bridge the gap by conducting a comprehensive study of 409 fixed bugs from five representative agentic frameworks. We propose a five-layer abstraction to cap-ture structural complexities in agentic frameworks, spanning from orchestration to infrastructure. Our study uncovers specialized symptoms, such as unexpected execution sequences and user con-figurations ignored, which are unique to autonomous orchestration. We further identify agent-specific root causes, including model-related faults, cognitive context mismanagement, and orchestration faults. Statistical analysis reveals cross-framework consistency and significant associations among these bug dimensions. Finally, our automated pattern mining identifies frequent bug-triggering pat-terns (e.g., model backend–ID combinations), and we show their transferability across different framework designs. Our findings fa-cilitate cross-platform testing and improve the reliability of agentic systems. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Software and its engineering → Software defect analysis ;

Software reliability .

## Keywords 

Agentic Frameworks, Bug Triggers, Software Reliability, Failure Modes, Bug Taxonomy, Empirical Study 

## 1 Introduction 

With the recent advancement of large language models (LLM), sev-eral modern agent orchestration frameworks such as LangChain, LangGraph, CrewAI, AutoGen, and SmolAgents have emerged, each with distinct characteristics. These frameworks enable developers to compose autonomous agents, coordinate multi-agent workflows, manage contextual reasoning, and invoke external tools at scale. As they form the backbone of a growing ecosystem of downstream ap-plications, defects within these frameworks can propagate widely, causing failures that range from silent semantic errors to system crashes. Therefore, it is important for developers and researchers to have a systematic understanding of the nature, causes, and trig-gering inputs of these defects. A recent empirical study of defects in three LLM agent frame-works (i.e., LangChain, LlamaIndex, and Haystack) [ 51 ] proposed a taxonomy of nine root cause categories and six symptom cate-gories, along with a four-component architectural abstraction: core schema, data preprocessing, agent construction, and featured mod-ules. The study established a baseline by identifying code logic is-sues (38%) and API misuse (24.7%) as dominant root causes, crashes (31.8%) and incorrect functionality (30.7%) as the most prevalent symptoms. It further highlighted unexpected output (16.5%) as a characteristic symptom, reflecting the probabilistic and genera-tive nature of LLM-based systems. Its abstractions center on data pipelines, retrieval-augmented generation, and prompt engineering. Despite these contributions, the prior study has three key limita-tions that motivate our work. First, it targets an earlier gener-ation of LLM frameworks whose abstractions center on four components: i) data preprocessing, ii) core schema, iii) agent con-struction, and iv) featured modules — a design philosophy that no longer reflects the current state of the ecosystem. Modern agentic ar-chitectures have shifted toward autonomous multi-agent execution, long-running stateful workflows, and direct model orchestration. Frameworks such as AutoGen, CrewAI, and SmolAgents introduce qualitatively distinct paradigms such as event-driven messaging, role-based agent teams, and code-executing agents, that lead to qualitatively different failure modes [ 37 ]. Consequently, the previ-ous four-component model, which is designed based on traditional software library structures, fails to capture the complexities of mod-ern agent coordination, dynamic task delegation, and emergent runtime behaviors that characterize modern agentic systems. 

Second, the study does not analyze bug-triggering scenar-ios , a critical gap for advancing automated testing of agentic frame-works. Knowing not only what bugs occur but under what conditions 

they manifest is essential for constructing fault-revealing test in-puts, designing test oracles, and supporting fault localization in multi-agent settings where non-deterministic interactions make reproduction inherently challenging. 

Third, the study does not examine the cross-framework transferability of bug characteristics , leaving open whether the identified taxonomy and patterns generalize across frameworks with fundamentally different design philosophies. A transferability analysis is essential to distinguish framework-specific anomalies from universal bug patterns, and to inform the development of framework-agnostic repair and testing techniques. To address these gaps, we present an empirical study of 409 fixed bugs from five representative frameworks: LangChain, Lang-Graph, CrewAI, AutoGen, and SmolAgents. To better reflect modern agentic architectures, we propose a refined five-layer abstraction comprising the Orchestration, Intelligence, Knowledge, Action, and Infrastructure layers. Our study aims to answer the following six Research Questions (RQs): 

> arXiv:2604.08906v1 [cs.SE] 10 Apr 2026

ArXiv, March 2026, Online Xiaowen Zhang, Hannuo Zhang, and Shin Hwei Tan 

Table 1: Summary of Key Findings and Implications 

RQs Findings & Implications 

Symptoms (Section 4) Crash/Error (54%), Build Failure (11%) and Unexpected Output (10%) are the most common symptoms, with build failures mostly due to import errors and unexpected outputs primarily involving model responses, agent decisions, or workflow outcomes. Comparison: Unlike [51], we distinguish Build Failure from crashes to highlight runtime initialization issues. 

Implications: Traditional fuzzing and environment checks remain essential, while Unexpected Output necessitates specialized techniques for validating various output. Unexpected Execution Sequence, User Configuration Ignored, and Incomplete/Incorrect Trace are new symptoms of modern agentic frameworks. 

Comparison : Unlike [51], which generalized such issues as crashes or incorrect functionality, we identify them as specialized orchestration symptoms. 

Implications: This reflects multi-agent orchestration complexity, indicating the need for specialized oracles for execution, configuration, and trace validation. Root Causes (Section 5) General Programming Faults (52%) are the most common root cause with Missing Case Handling (12%) as the leading issue, reflecting persistent traditional software issues. 

Implications: Existing automated testing and debugging techniques remain effective in addressing most conventional defects. Agent-specific Faults (22%) emerge as a unique challenge in modern frameworks, with Model-Related Faults (12%) as a leading individual root cause. Comparison: Unlike [51], we distinguish Model-Related Fault, Cognitive Context Mismanagement, and Orchestration Fault from code logic issues and API misuse to highlight agent-specific challenges. 

Implications: These faults shift reliability from code correctness to interaction correctness, necessitating specialized validation strategies for model compatibility and orchestration, such as schema alignment, context propagation, and execution order. Documentation Faults emerge as the third largest root cause category (12%) and primarily stem from incorrect or obsolete example code, including bundled sample programs. 

Implications: There is a need for automated documentation generation and maintenance tools to keep code examples aligned with evolving APIs and ensure documentation reliability. Bug-Prone Components (Section 6) Bug concentration in Intelligence (25%) and Orchestration (20%) layers mirrors each framework’s architectural priorities, such as code executors for SmolAgents. 

Comparison: Unlike early pipelines dominated by Data Processing (40%) [51], modern agentic frameworks shift the reliability bottleneck to Intelligence and Orchestration. 

Implications: Effective testing strategies should be tailored to framework-specific designs rather than applied uniformly. Developers prioritize testing deterministic components, achieving 66% coverage for Orchestration and 61% for Action bugs, while leaving the more vulnerable Intelligence at 47%. 

Implications: Future testing efforts and automated bug detection research should shift their focus toward the intelligence layer to bridge the current validation gap. Commonality & Associations (Section 7) Bug symptoms, root causes, and component distributions exhibit substantial commonality across frameworks with similarity scores ranging from 0.62 to 0.88. 

Implications: It indicates that bugs in agentic frameworks follow recurring patterns rather than isolated cases, enabling the development of cross-framework quality assurance standards. Statistical analysis identifies significant category associations among bug symptoms, root causes, and components, revealing that Orchestration components frequently compromise state and sequence integrity, and Action/Knowledge often lack defensive logic against LLM-driven interactions. 

Implications: These relationships facilitate the design of symptom-based test oracles and defensive logic targeted at specific root causes within each component. Triggering Scenarios (Section 8) Our frequent pattern minging technique reveals that 92% of bug-triggering scenarios involve element configurations, with 8% requiring specific model backend and ID combinations. 

Implications: These patterns could guide the design of automated test generation by prioritizing error-prone configuration spaces and cross-backend compatibility checks. Input patterns (21% of all bugs) capture recurring bug-triggering input characteristics, dominated by task intents (34%), LLM response schemas (21%), and message features (20%). 

Implications: These patterns necessitate efficient test generation to cover diverse requirements and non-deterministic edge-case outputs across various LLM endpoints. Bug-triggering operations account for 37% of all bugs, led by CallTool (24%) and ExportComponent (16%). 

Implications: These identified bug-triggering operations could guide automated test generation to prioritize complex execution paths beyond standard routines. Transferability (Section 9) 46% of sampled bugs are transferable across frameworks, appearing as adapted functional counterparts or as generalized variants. Notably, all 11 submitted reports received substantive technical engagement and acknowledgment from maintainers or community contributors. 

Implications: These results indicate that existing bug patterns serve as effective templates for cross-framework test generation, bridging the gap between diverse agentic implementations. 

RQ1 (Symptoms): What are the prevalent symptoms of bugs in modern agentic frameworks? Analyzing symptoms identifies unique failure modes in modern agentic frameworks, to aid the develop-ment of effective test oracles. 

RQ2 (Root Causes): What are the common root causes of these bugs? Uncovering root causes reveals fundamental design flaws and challenges stemming from autonomous orchestration and LLM integration that compromise framework reliability. 

RQ3 (Bug-prone Components): Which architectural layers are most susceptible to defects, and where does developer testing efforts primarily focus? This analysis identifies bug-prone components and reveals potential misalignment between developer testing focus and the actual distribution of bugs. 

RQ4 (Commonality & Association): Do symptoms, root causes, and components exhibit commonality across frameworks, and what are the relationships between these dimensions? This analysis reveals systemic failures and guides developers in prioritizing testing for critical failure patterns. 

RQ5 (Triggering Scenarios): What user-side scenarios are most likely to trigger bugs in agentic frameworks? Understanding these scenarios helps guide the design of automated test generation tools that effectively target common failure-inducing inputs. 

RQ6 (Transferability): To what extent are bug-triggering scenarios transferable across different framework designs? Exploring transfer-ability facilitates the generalization of localized bugs as framework-agnostic benchmarks for systematic cross-platform validation. Specifically, this paper makes the following contributions: 

Empirical Study of Modern Agentic Frameworks. We conduct a comprehensive analysis of 409 fixed bugs across five contem-porary frameworks, and construct a five-layer component model aligning with agentic abstractions. Table 1 summarized the key findings of our study. 

Taxonomies of Agentic Failures. We develop a taxonomy to cap-ture failures unique to agentic frameworks. Our study identifies new symptoms such as unexpected execution sequences, user con-figuration ignored, and incomplete/incorrect traces, which call for the design of domain-specific test oracles. Moreover, our root cause taxonomy isolates agent-specific faults, including model-related faults, cognitive context mismanagement, and orchestration faults. 

Study of Bug Triggering Condition and Transferability. We present the first systematic study of bug-triggering conditions of agentic framework bugs. By deconstructing triggering scenarios, we identify error-prone factors across element configurations, input patterns, and operations. We further explore the cross-framework transferability of these conditions, providing actionable insights for proactive defense and robust benchmarking. 

## 2 Background and Related Work 

2.0.1 Evolution of Agentic Frameworks. LLM application devel-opment has transitioned from using simple utility libraries to re-lying on complex autonomous orchestration infrastructures [ 37 ]. Early frameworks [ 15 , 27 , 38 , 52 ] served as stateless intermedi-aries, providing standardized interfaces for prompt construction, retrieval-augmented generation pipelines, and basic API wrapping. In this paradigm, frameworks served as modular tool collections rather than cohesive execution environments, leaving developers Dissecting Bug Triggers and Failure Modes in Modern Agentic Frameworks: An Empirical Study ArXiv, March 2026, Online 

Figure 1: Conceptual architecture of agentic frameworks. 

to manually manage conversation state and multi-step workflows. In contrast, modern agentic frameworks such as LangGraph [ 17 ], CrewAI [ 12 ], AutoGen [ 49 ], and SmolAgents [ 44 ] have introduced integrated runtime environments characterized by persistent state management and autonomous decision loops. Unlike earlier ap-proaches, they support cyclic control flows and coordination, real-ized through patterns such as event-driven messaging, role-based agent teams, and sandboxed code execution. This evolution shifts the framework’s role from a passive library to an active orches-trator managing context persistence and dynamic tool invocation. Consequently, system correctness becomes tightly coupled to the framework’s coordination logic and state transition semantics. 

2.0.2 Study Scope and Framework Selection. To ensure a rigorous empirical analysis, we classify bugs into three levels: framework-level, application-level bugs, and task-level failures. We define 

framework-level bugs as defects within the source code of agen-tic frameworks, such as recovery errors, that occur independently of model capabilities. In contrast, application-level bugs stem from the misuse of framework APIs or errors in user-defined logic during system construction. Distinct from software defects, task-level failures refer to behavioral issues (e.g., hallucinations) where the agent fails an objective despite the code operating as intended, often representing the inherent uncertainty of model outputs. This three-tier distinction is essential for isolating the orchestration infrastructure from both application logic and model performance. We selected five agentic frameworks from a recent survey [ 4] to represent diverse architectures and abstraction levels. LangChain 

typifies linear and directed acyclic graph (DAG) orchestration, while 

LangGraph introduces stateful cyclic graphs for iterative reason-ing. To represent multi-agent collaboration, we include CrewAI, which prioritizes structured process-oriented workflows, and Au-toGen, which facilitates autonomous conversation-driven inter-actions. Finally, SmolAgents represents a code-centric paradigm where agents interact primarily through sandboxed code executors. 

2.0.3 Modern Agentic Framework Abstraction. To systematically analyze diverse agentic frameworks, we propose a five-layer archi-tectural model (Figure 1), spanning from low-level environment management to high-level multi-agent coordination. We derived this abstraction by synthesizing conceptual components from re-cent literature [ 32 ] and functional modules in the five studied frame-works. Unlike the prior study that groups framework-specific mod-ules into a flat “Featured Modules” category [ 51 ], our abstraction redistributes them into functional layers, capturing the integrated nature of agentic systems. 

Infrastructure provides the runtime backbone for execution loops, inter-agent communication, lifecycle management, and monitoring, ensuring reliable operation and visibility into agent workflows. 

Action interfaces agents with the external environment via tools, code executors, and delegation mechanisms that translate agent decisions into concrete operations. 

Knowledge manages context, state, and data through memory stores, retrievers, and data contracts, supporting state persistence and consistent information flow across agents and workflows. 

Intelligence serves as the cognitive engine, managing inference, se-mantic mapping, and protocol adaptation through models, adapters, prompts, embedders, and output parsers that convert raw LLM re-sponses into structured, actionable representations. 

Orchestration defines agents, task structures, and collaboration topologies, governing dynamic execution through workflow and graph-based connections, planning, termination conditions, and team management, with construction tooling to instantiate these structures from configurations or blueprints. 

## 2.1 Related Work 

Task- and Application-level Failures. Recent studies examine agent failure modes at the task level, focusing on inter-agent mis-alignment [ 42 ] or planning and execution errors [ 40 ]. Others ex-plore the application layer, identifying bugs in prompt engineering or end-user logic [ 35 ]. While these studies offer valuable insights into agent behavior, they primarily analyze model-driven symp-toms or application-specific faults. Our study targets the framework layer, investigating internal source code and architectural defects of the orchestration engines that underpin these systems. 

Framework-level Bug Characterization. While Xue et al. char-acterize bugs in early LLM pipelines [ 51 ], our work addresses the complexities of modern multi-agent systems through a more gran-ular five-layer architectural model. We move beyond general pro-gramming errors to identify specialized agent-specific symptoms and root causes (e.g., cognitive context mismanagement). We fur-ther evaluate bug-triggering scenarios and their cross-framework transferability, offering a predictive perspective on structural vul-nerabilities that are absent in prior literature. 

## 3 Methodology 

3.0.1 Data Collection. We collected bug-related issues with con-firmed fixes from the official GitHub repositories of the selected agentic frameworks using a systematic pipeline to identify trace-able issue–fix pairs. We mined all closed issues labeled as bugs, sorted by creation time from newest to oldest. Then, we filtered out issues without a “completed” state_reason , excluding those unlikely to have fixes, such as not-planned issues. To identify cor-responding fixes, we retrieved timeline events for each issue and collected cross-referenced pull request (PR) links. Due to GitHub API rate limits, we examined only the first 100 events per issue and retained the latest 500 issues with linked PRs per framework. By our collection cutoff date (August 11, 2025), this process yielded 820 candidate issues: LangChain 419, LangGraph 25, CrewAI 96, AutoGen 183, and SmolAgents 97. Given the large number of issues in LangChain, we randomly sampled 100 LangChain issues and combined them with all others, resulting in 501 issues for manual ArXiv, March 2026, Online Xiaowen Zhang, Hannuo Zhang, and Shin Hwei Tan 

verification. During manual verification, we kept only issues with PRs that fixed bugs in the core framework implementation, exclud-ing duplicates, multi-bug reports, issues without fixes, or fixes only affecting peripheral tools (e.g., CrewAI CLI and AutoGen Studio) or test code. After filtering, 409 issues remained: LangChain 88, LangGraph 17, CrewAI 77, AutoGen 146, and SmolAgents 81. As LangGraph is built on LangChain components and they are often used together, we collectively refer to both framework as LC/LG. 

3.0.2 Data Annotation. For each bug report, we systematically annotated four dimensions: symptoms, root causes, buggy compo-nents, and triggering patterns. Following prior work [ 30 , 48 , 54 ], we derived our taxonomy using an open-coding approach. One author first reviewed all issues and associated fixes to establish an initial set of categories. Two authors independently annotated the collected issues across 11 batches, covering 5% of the data in the first two batches and 10% in each subsequent iteration. After each batch, we measured inter-annotator agreement using Cohen’s kappa [ 47 ]and resolved disagreements through discussion, iteratively refining the categories and involving a third author when consensus could not be reached. The average kappa was 0.68 in the first iteration, improved to 0.96 in the second, and consistently exceeded 0.89 in all remaining iterations. This manual analysis spanned six person-months as it required extensive documentation review to gain a deeper understanding of agentic frameworks. 

3.0.3 Analysis Methods. To address RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3, our study developed taxonomies for bug symptoms, root causes, and compo-nents by analyzing the 409 bug reports and their associated fixes. For RQ3, we determined the affected conceptual components based on the functionality of the modified code and check if each bug fix had corresponding test cases. Then, we further analyzed the commonality and association among these dimensions (RQ4). 

Commonality analysis: To assess cross-framework consistency of bug characteristics, we evaluated the distributional similarity of symptoms, root causes, and components across the selected frameworks. While prior studies [ 30 , 39 , 46 ] used Spearman or Pearson correlation, these metrics can be misleading. Specifically, rank-based Spearman is sensitive to minor permutations in low-frequency categories, while linear Pearson is skewed by domi-nant categories. To obtain a more robust measure, we employed 

Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) [41 ], which measures the over-lap between two probability distributions by comparing each to their mean. We then derived the Jensen-Shannon (JS) similarity as 

1 − √𝐽𝑆𝐷 , ranging from 0 (completely different) to 1 (identical). 

Association analysis: To investigate relationships among symp-toms, root causes, and components, we followed the statistical approach in [ 48 ]. First, we applied the Chi-squared test of inde-pendence to identify significant associations between dimension pairs (e.g., symptoms and root causes). We then used Cramér’s 𝑉 to measure association strength. Following Cohen’s guidelines [ 31 ], we interpreted 𝑉 values as weak (0.1–0.2), moderate (0.2–0.3), or strong (>0.3). To identify significant category pairs, we conducted a post-hoc analysis with a Bonferroni correction [ 45 ], ensuring only associations unlikely by chance were marked significant. To answer RQ5, we analyzed bug-triggering scenarios for 273 bugs with reproduction code or descriptive configuration. Unlike a prior study on refactoring engines [ 48 ] where bugs often arise from simple input code, agentic frameworks exhibit complex interactions between element configurations, task types, and runtime behaviors. We characterized these via three sub-dimensions: Element Config-urations (251 bugs), Input Patterns (56), and Operations (101). We define a factor as a bug-triggering characteristic, where a single bug may involve multiple factors per sub-dimension. Specifically, 

Element Configurations involve static element settings and envi-ronment variables, typically represented as element-attribute pairs (e.g., model:modelId ). Input Patterns characterize runtime data such as task semantics or LLM responses. Operations denote func-tional behaviors, such as explicit tool calls, that exceed standard routines (i.e., basic inference passes). 

Automated Frequent Pattern Mining: To identify recurring bug-triggering patterns, we applied FP-Growth [ 33 ], a technique proven effective for frequent pattern mining in log analysis [ 43 , 53 ]. Each bug is treated as a transaction of factors, and an FP-tree is con-structed to compactly encode shared structure. Mining this tree re-veals frequent co-occurring factor sets above a support threshold, al-lowing us to characterize common multi-factor bug-triggering con-ditions. For factor combinations, we adopted a mixed-granularity approach to capture patterns across hierarchical levels. For any factor in the form 𝑎 : 𝑏 , we augmented the set by injecting its parent factor 𝑎 . We set FP-Growth min_support to 0.05, requiring a pattern to appear in at least 5% of cases, and excluded patterns with fewer than five occurrences. 

Transferability: To answer RQ6, we investigated whether bugs from one agentic framework recur in others. Given their shared analogous abstractions and coordination logic, we hypothesized cross-framework manifestations and sampled 35 representative bugs from the three triggering dimensions. Specifically, we ran-domly sampled bugs for the Element Configurations, while for Input Characteristics, we prioritized message-triggered bugs due to their high portability. For Operations, we selected export/load-related bugs to maximize adaptation feasibility. We evaluated these scenarios against the latest versions of LangChain (1.2.7), Lang-Graph (1.0.7), CrewAI (1.9.2), AutoGen (0.7.5), SmolAgents (1.24.0). For each source bug, we evaluated its presence across the four re-maining frameworks. For each target framework, we first searched its GitHub repository for existing reports. A target issue was catego-rized as Duplicate if its reproducible code was functional equivalent to the source. If no duplicate existed, we manually adapted the source bug code to the target framework. Upon successfully trigger-ing the bug, we submitted a report and recorded it as an Adapted 

issue. If adaptation failed, we searched for a Variant issue sharing the same failure pattern based on the original bug-triggering fac-tors but differing in component or context. For each source bug, only the highest-priority relation was recorded per target frame-work. A source bug is considered transferable if at least one target framework contains a Duplicate, Adapted, or Variant issue. 

## 4 RQ1: Symptoms 

4.0.1 Symptom Categories. Our analysis led to nine distinct symp-tom categories described below: 

Crash/Error. The framework or its internal components throw an exception, as indicated by error messages or stack traces. Dissecting Bug Triggers and Failure Modes in Modern Agentic Frameworks: An Empirical Study ArXiv, March 2026, Online 

Build Failure. The framework fails to start during setup or initial-ization due to module import errors, invalid configuration parame-ters, installation issues, or syntax errors. 

Unexpected Intermediate State. A transient internal state pro-duced during execution deviates from expectations. Users typically observe such deviations in logs, debug outputs, or code, and report them without mentioning any resulting consequences. 

Unexpected Output. 

There is a mismatch between the expected and actual results, in-cluding responses from LLMs, agent decisions, workflow outcomes, tool and utility results, or serialized exports. Such deviations may stem from the non-deterministic behavior of underlying models or orchestration defects within agents and workflows. For example, SmolAgents-1481 illustrates an unexpected agent decision, where the manager prematurely returned an incomplete answer before collecting all parallel subtask results [8]. 

Unexpected Execution Sequence. The framework produces an interaction sequence that deviates from the intended agent inter-action order or task progression, such as order mismatch, early exit, unexpected continuation, or missing tool calls. For instance, in AutoGen-6710, the workflow manager mishandled loops, pre-venting any agents from activating and causing an early exit [25]. 

Incomplete/Incorrect Trace. The framework generates partial or misformatted execution traces or logs, hindering analysis and de-bugging. A case is AutoGen-6531, where the log of an LLMCallEvent 

omitted available tools, losing crucial execution context [18]. 

Performance Anomaly. The framework exhibits degraded per-formance or unresponsiveness, such as slow execution or hangs. 

User Configuration Ignored. The framework silently ignores user-provided configurations, rendering them ineffective. For exam-ple, in LangChain-32059 [ 14 ], setting num_gpu=4 for OllamaEmbeddings 

had no effect, with all computations falling back to CPU. 

Others. This includes rare or miscellaneous symptoms that do not fit into other categories (e.g., broken documentation links). 

Table 2: Bug distribution by symptoms and frameworks.                                                                                                         

> Symptom Total LC/LG CrewAI AutoGen SmolAgents #%#%#%#%#%
> Crash/Error 222 54.28 54 13.20 34 8.31 78 19.07 56 13.69
> Build Failure 47 11.49 71.71 17 4.16 16 3.91 71.71
> Unexpected Output 41 10.02 21 5.13 30.73 10 2.44 71.71
> Unexpected Intermediate State 29 7.09 51.22 61.47 16 3.91 20.49 Unexpected Execution Sequence 20 4.89 40.98 51.22 81.96 30.73 User Configuration Ignored 14 3.42 51.22 40.98 30.73 20.49 Incomplete/Incorrect Trace 12 2.93 20.49 30.73 51.22 20.49 Performance Anomaly 92.20 30.73 20.49 30.73 10.24 Others 15 3.67 40.98 30.73 71.71 10.24

4.0.2 Symptom Distribution. Table 2 presents the frequency and percentage of bug symptoms across studied frameworks. Crash/Error 

(54%) is the most prevalent symptom, reflecting persistent chal-lenges in execution stability, consistent with prior studies on frame-work bugs [ 30 , 51 ]. Automated techniques like fuzzing remain effec-tive for detecting these runtime failures. Build Failure (11%) ranks second, with most cases (30/47) arising from module import errors caused by missing dependencies, version conflicts, or incomplete framework module exports. Due to Python’s interpreted nature and dynamic imports, these issues appear only at runtime, reveal-ing gaps between configuration correctness and execution-time validation. Unexpected Output (10%) is the third most common symptom, particularly in LC/LG (5%). Most cases (18/41) originate from core components, including model, agent, or workflow out-puts. These issues reflect the stochastic nature of LLMs and logic flaws in agent or workflow orchestration, which lead to subop-timal decisions or incorrect final results, highlighting challenges in maintaining semantic and structural correctness in framework-generated data. 

Finding 1a: Crash/Error (54%), Build Failure (11%), and Unex-pected Output (10%) are the most common bug symptoms. While traditional techniques (e.g., fuzzing, environment checks) remain effective, Unexpected Output necessitates specialized techniques for validating various output (e.g., model responses, agent decisions, and workflow outcomes). 

Compared to the baseline study [ 51 ], we identify four isolated symptoms in modern agentic frameworks. Build Failure now appears distinct from runtime crashes, reflecting growing preva-lence of initialization failures in dependency-heavy agentic stacks, whereas the baseline study subsumes import errors under the “Crash” symptom. Unexpected Execution Sequence , User Con-figuration Ignored , and Incomplete/Incorrect Trace are unique to modern frameworks, capturing failures in multi-agent orchestra-tion, configuration enforcement, and trace recording (concerns that were absent or conflated with application-layer issues in earlier frameworks). These findings indicate a critical gap: existing test oracles are insufficient for validating execution paths, configuration effects, and trace integrity in modern agentic systems, motivating the need for specialized testing support at the framework level. 

Finding 1b: Unexpected Execution Sequence, User Configuration Ignored, and Incomplete/Incorrect Trace are new features of modern agentic frameworks. This reflects multi-agent orchestration com-plexity, indicating the need for specialized oracles for execution, configuration, and trace validation. 

## 5 RQ2: Root Causes 

Our analysis grouped the root causes of 409 bugs into five cate-gories: Agent-Specific Fault, General Programming Fault, Depen-dency/Environment Fault, Documentation Fault, and User Misuse. 

5.0.1 Agent-Specific Fault. These faults reflect incorrect design de-cisions, assumptions, or execution policies in agentic frameworks, potentially disrupting agents’ reasoning, perception, or orchestra-tion. Fixing them requires domain knowledge, including interaction specifications and context propagation principles. We divide these defects into three categories: Model-Related Fault , Cognitive Context Mismanagement , and Orchestration Fault .

Model-Related Fault. These faults arise from misalignments be-tween framework logic and LLM service chain, including the model, its API endpoint, and its client SDK (e.g., LiteLLM [28]): 

• Model Request Incompatibility (25/48): The framework con-structs inputs violating LLM-specific constraints (e.g., unsup-ported parameters or message formats), causing invalid request ArXiv, March 2026, Online Xiaowen Zhang, Hannuo Zhang, and Shin Hwei Tan            

> 1def _process_create_args(self, messages): ...
> 2+# Gemini only accepts a single system message
> 3+if create_args.get("model", "").startswith( "gemini-" ):
> 4+messages = create_args["messages"] # list of messages
> 5+messages = self._merge_system_messages (create\_args["messages"])
> 6...

(a) Model Request Incompatibility: AutoGen-6116           

> 1# chunk1: {"name":"search", "args":’{"query":’, "id":"1", "index":1}
> 2# chunk2: {"name":None, "args":’ "test"}’, "id":None, "index":0}
> 3# [Fix] Handle chunks where model omits name/id
> 4+elif (e.get("type") == "tool_call_chunk" and merged
> 5+and e.get("name") is None and e.get("id") is None):
> 6+merge\_special\_chunk(e, merged)

(b) Model Response Incompatibility: LangChain-31511                            

> 1def tool(tool_function: Callable) -> Tool:
> 2class SimpleTool(Tool):
> 3-def __init__(self, name:str, ..., function: Callable):
> 4-self.name = name
> 5-...
> 6-self.forward = function
> 7+def __init__(self):
> 8self.is_initialized = True
> 910 ...
> 11 -simple_tool=SimpleTool(name=tool_json_schema["name"], ..., function=tool_function) ↩→
> 12 -...
> 13 +SimpleTool.name = tool_json_schema["name"]
> 14 +...
> 15 +SimpleTool.forward = staticmethod(tool_function)
> 16 +simple_tool = SimpleTool()
> 17 return simple_tool

(c) Class Design Defect: SmolAgents-913             

> 1# prompts/toolcalling_agent.yaml
> 2system_prompt: |-
> 3-You can give requests to team members...The only argument you can give is ’request’ .
> 4+You can give tasks to team members...The only argument you can give is ’task’ .

(d) Prompt Fault: SmolAgents-606     

> 1runtime = Runtime(context=context, store=store, stream_writer=stream_writer, previous=None)
> 2+parent_runtime = config[CONF].get(CONFIG_KEY_RUNTIME, DEFAULT_RUNTIME)
> 3+runtime = parent_runtime.merge(runtime)

(e) Context Propagation Fault: LangChain-5700      

> 1def to_messages(self, summary_mode: bool, **kwargs) -> List[Message]: ...
> 2return [Message(role=MessageRole.ASSISTANT,content=[{"type":"text","text":self.plan}]),
> 3+Message( role=MessageRole.USER, content=[{"type":"text","text":"Execute the plan."}]),
> 4]

(f) Message Fault: SmolAgents-1097 

Figure 2: Simplified code snippets illustrating representative root causes. 

errors. In AutoGen-6116 [ 11 ] (Figure 2a), Gemini-2.0-Flash re-sponded only to the final system message when multiple were provided. This is fixed by merging all system messages. 

• Model Response Incompatibility (19/48): The framework fails to parse or merge model responses due to nondeterministic be-havior or uncommon response schema. In LangChain-31511 [ 24 ](Figure 2b), the framework failed to merge tool call chunks from Qwen3 when subsequent chunks lacked name and id . The fix added merging logic to handle such omissions. 

• Other causes (4/48): The framework fails due to access restric-tions, incorrect model metadata, or unsupported features. 

Cognitive Context Mismanagement. We define cognitive context 

as runtime information shaping agents’ situational awareness (e.g., conversation history, knowledge, tasks, tools, and collaborators). Mismanaging this context disrupts agent cognition, leading to de-graded understanding, inconsistent decisions, or incorrect actions. 

• Prompt Fault (8/24): Predefined prompts may contain faults (e.g., incorrect task specifications, insufficient instructions), lead-ing to unexpected outputs. In SmolAgents-606 (Figure 2d) [ 7], a manager agent failed to delegate tasks because its system prompt had the wrong parameter ( request instead of task ) . 

• Message Fault (6/24): Errors in managing conversation history (e.g., missing messages, wrong roles, history truncation). For example, in SmolAgents-1097 (Figure 2f), exporting a planning step as an assistant message, caused some LLMs to keep planning instead of executing [ 20 ] due to the failure to signal a role change, disrupting the agent’s cognitive shift between task phases. 

• Context Propagation Fault (10/24): The framework fails to propagate/isolate cognitive context, resulting in inconsistent or stale context across steps, agents, or components. For instance, LangChain-5700 (Figure 2e) reported that a subgraph could not access the runtime context of its parent graph, because the frame-work did not merge the parent context into the subgraph [21]. 

Orchestration Fault. These faults reflect incorrect coordination of agentic workflows, spanning navigation (workflow routing, speaker selection), termination (signal and condition handling), and compo-nent coordination (concurrency, mode transitions, action alignment). For instance, AutoGen-6710 [ 25 ] exhibited premature termination due to incorrect cycle tracking, leaving prerequisites unsatisfied and blocking agent execution. 

5.0.2 General Programming Fault. This encompasses common cod-ing mistakes, divided into 12 sub-types. Following prior work [ 36 ,50 ], we organize these according to descending scope, ranging from broad feature-level defects to narrow statement-level errors. 

Missing Case Handling. The framework does not implement specific features or edge cases. For example, in AutoGen-5518, the framework did not support PowerShell code, producing an incorrect file extension, causing the local executor to reject the code [19]. 

Class Design Defect. Framework classes may violate architec-tural constraints (e.g., incorrect inheritance or invalid protocols). In SmolAgents-913 [ 10 ], SimpleTool broke validation rules by defin-ing __init__ parameters without defaults, causing errors when exported for sandbox execution. The fix (Figure 2c) removed these parameters and assigned them externally to ensure compliance. 

State/Resource Mismanagement. This involves mishandled state updates or resource lifecycles, causing inconsistencies or failed operations. In AutoGen-6308 [ 5], a SearchClient was closed pre-maturely by an async with block, causing later tool calls to fail. 

Concurrency Fault. The framework mishandles concurrent exe-cution (e.g., asynchronous tasks, thread-unsafe scheduling, or race conditions). In AutoGen-4490 [ 3 ], unawaited WriteStateAsync() 

caused out-of-order writes and InconsistentStateException .

Serialization Fault. The framework mishandles (de)serialization, violating high-level data contract assumptions (e.g., schema consis-tency, completeness, idempotence) beyond code-level errors. 

API Misuse. The framework violates API contracts by passing invalid or missing parameters, leading to invocation failures or ineffective calls. Dissecting Bug Triggers and Failure Modes in Modern Agentic Frameworks: An Empirical Study ArXiv, March 2026, Online 

Missing Parameter Forwarding. These faults occur when op-tional parameters fail to reach their intended targets due to omis-sion or absence in the receiving interface. Such faults rarely trigger errors but may silently affect downstream processing. 

Wrong Control Flow. The framework executes in incorrect order or under unintended conditions due to incorrect control flow (e.g., evaluating the wrong branch [13]). 

Missing Check. The framework executes existing logic without validating preconditions (e.g., nullity, state, or existence checks), allowing invalid inputs or states to propagate. 

Incorrect Variable/Value. The framework uses incorrect variables or values, mismanages local variable updates, or constructs values with incorrect structures. 

Type Fault. The framework incorrectly uses or converts data types, resulting in type mismatches, invalid casting, or improper type conversions that violate expected type constraints. 

5.0.3 Dependency/Environment Fault. This category covers prob-lems with software dependencies or the runtime environment. 

Dependency Fault. These faults stem from missing or incompati-ble dependencies, third-party library bugs, or structural issues (e.g., improper module exports and rigid coupling) that hinder integra-tion and extensibility. 

Environment Incompatibility. These occur when the framework is incompatible with execution environment (e.g., operating system, Python version, container image, hardware or drivers). 

5.0.4 Documentation Fault. This arises when documentation or tutorials misrepresent framework interfaces, behavior, or usage, en-compassing incorrect examples (32/51), missing constraints (10/51), and outdated descriptions (9/51). For instance, CrewAI-2647 [ 6]reported an authentication error when enabling planning for a 

Crew using non-OpenAI models, as the framework silently invoked 

gpt-4o-mini for planning without documenting the implicit Ope-nAI API key requirement. 

5.0.5 User Misuse. This category includes issues caused by in-correct interactions or misconfigurations by the user rather than internal framework defects. 

5.0.6 Root Cause Distribution. Table 3 summarizes the distribution of root causes across studied frameworks, including raw counts (#) and proportions (%). General Programming Faults account for the majority (52%), followed by Agent-Specific Faults (22%). This distri-bution indicates a dual challenge: while traditional software defects remain prevalent, the emergence of domain-specific faults highlights the unique complexity of agentic systems . Among general faults, Missing Case Handling (12.47%) is the most frequent subcategory, suggesting that developers still struggle with logic completeness. As these general faults require no specialized domain expertise, they remain addressable through conventional debugging practices. While the baseline study identifies Code Logic Issues (38%) and 

API Misuse (25%) as dominant in early LLM pipelines [ 51 ], our analysis reveals a shift toward semantic and coordination faults in modern agentic frameworks. We decouple Model-Related Fault 

(11.74%) from generic API misuse to highlight adaptation gaps be-tween framework logic and heterogeneous model protocols. Sim-ilarly, coordination issues previously subsumed under code logic are now distinguished as Cognitive Context Mismanagement 

(5.87%) and Orchestration Fault (3.91%). Agent-Specific Faults (22%) are the most technically demanding, requiring expertise in model interaction and multi-agent orchestra-tion. Model-Related Faults rank on par with Missing Case Handling, underscoring that interaction correctness is now as critical as logic completeness, shifting reliability concerns beyond code correct-ness and demanding specialized validation oracles. Documentation Faults (12%), driven largely by incorrect examples, highlight the need for automated documentation maintenance tools. Unlike lo-calized errors, these defects stem from misaligned assumptions about autonomous behaviors, shifting the reliability focus from code correctness to interaction correctness and necessitating spe-cialized validation oracles. Meanwhile, Documentation Faults (12%) primarily stem from incorrect example code, highlighting the need for automated tools to generate and maintain documentation. 

Finding 2: Our root cause analysis shows: (1) General Programming Faults are the most prevalent (52%) , led by Missing Case Handling (12.47%), showing that traditional debugging techniques can still mitigate most defects. (2) Agent-specific Faults (22%) emerge as a unique challenge, with most are Model-Related Faults (11.74%), necessitating specialized test oracles to address challenges in model compatibility and interaction correctness. (3) Documentation Faults (12%) stem mainly from obsolete/incorrect example code. 

## 6 RQ3: Bug-prone Components 

Table 4 shows the bug distribution across framework components. While our analysis primarily focuses on functional components, we also include “Documentation” to provide a comprehensive view of all reported issues. We included a Tested column to measure the percentage of bug fixes accompanied by test cases, reflecting the validation rigor for each component. A clear concentration of bugs emerges in core functional components, with Intelligence accounting for the largest share (25%), followed by Orchestration (20%) and Action (15%). These results indicate that model adaptation and coordination logic are the primary sources of failure. While the baseline study [ 51 ] identified Data Processing (40%) and Core Schema (24%) as the key bug-prone components in early pipelines, our results show the reliability bottleneck has shifted to Intelligence and Orchestration in modern agentic frameworks, reflecting the increasing complexity of multi-agent coordination. Our five-layer abstraction pinpoints bugs in model adaptation and coordination logic that are collapsed together in prior study. 

Finding 3a: Bug concentration in Intelligence (25%) and Orchestra-tion (20%) layers mirrors each framework’s architectural priorities, suggesting that effective testing strategies should be tailored to framework-specific designs rather than applied uniformly. 

Our analysis also reveals a significant misalignment between empirical risk and testing effort. While Intelligence is the most bug-prone, it receives the lowest test coverage (47%), whereas Orches-tration and Action see much higher coverage (66% and 61%). This validates the testing bias toward deterministic artifacts observed in prior work [ 34 ] and further quantifies the direct reliability cost, as the avoidance of non-deterministic components leads to higher bug density in Intelligence. Furthermore, our data reveals that this ArXiv, March 2026, Online Xiaowen Zhang, Hannuo Zhang, and Shin Hwei Tan 

Table 3: The number of bugs due to different root cause in each agentic framework. 

Root Cause Subcategory Total LC/LG CrewAI AutoGen SmolAgents # % # % # % # % # %

General Programming Fault Missing Case Handling 51 12.47 17 4.16 9 2.20 7 1.71 18 4.40 Incorrect Variable/Value 26 6.36 12 2.93 6 1.47 3 0.73 5 1.22 Wrong Control Flow 23 5.62 8 1.96 6 1.47 7 1.71 2 0.49 Class Design Defect 19 4.65 6 1.47 2 0.49 6 1.47 5 1.22 Type Fault 18 4.40 7 1.71 5 1.22 4 0.98 2 0.49 State/Resource Mismanagement 17 4.16 5 1.22 1 0.24 10 2.44 1 0.24 Missing Check 17 4.16 9 2.20 1 0.24 6 1.47 1 0.24 API Misuse 16 3.91 2 0.49 4 0.98 8 1.96 2 0.49 Missing Parameter Forwarding 10 2.44 3 0.73 3 0.73 3 0.73 1 0.24 Serialization Fault 9 2.20 1 0.24 2 0.49 5 1.22 1 0.24 Concurrency Fault 6 1.47 0 0.00 1 0.24 5 1.22 0 0.00 

Subtotal 212 51.83 70 17.11 40 9.78 64 15.65 38 9.29 

Agent-Specific Fault Model-Related Fault 48 11.74 11 2.69 1 0.24 28 6.85 8 1.96 Cognitive Context Mismanagement 24 5.87 2 0.49 6 1.47 7 1.71 9 2.20 Orchestration Fault 16 3.91 2 0.49 5 1.22 8 1.96 1 0.24 

Subtotal 88 21.52 15 3.67 12 2.93 43 10.51 18 4.40 

Documentation Fault 51 12.47 8 1.96 8 1.96 16 3.91 19 4.65 Dependency/Environment Fault Dependency Fault 35 8.56 10 2.44 9 2.20 12 2.93 4 0.98 Environment Incompatibility 12 2.93 0 0.00 5 1.22 5 1.22 2 0.49 

Subtotal 47 11.49 10 2.44 14 3.42 17 4.16 6 1.47 

User Misuse 11 2.69 2 0.49 3 0.73 6 1.47 0 0.00 

Table 4: Bug distribution by components and frameworks.                                                                                                      

> Component Total LC/LG CrewAI AutoGen SmolAgents Tested #%#%#%#%#%#%
> Intelligence 101 24.69 38 9.29 61.47 42 10.27 15 3.67 47 46.53 Orchestration 82 20.05 71.71 23 5.62 36 8.80 16 3.91 54 65.85
> Action 62 15.16 71.71 92.20 22 5.38 24 5.87 38 61.29
> Knowledge 56 13.69 30 7.33 13 3.18 10 2.44 30.73 25 44.64 Infrastructure 54 13.20 14 3.42 16 3.91 19 4.65 51.22 17 31.48 Documentation 54 13.20 92.20 10 2.44 17 4.16 18 4.40 00.00
> Total 409 100.00 105 25.70 77 18.80 146 35.70 81 19.80 181 44.30

validation gap persists even during the bug-fixing process. It indi-cates that current testing infrastructures are inadequately equipped to mock or simulate these complex external dependencies, calling for contract-aware testing tools that can validate integration logic without relying on expensive or non-deterministic model calls. 

Finding 3b: Developers prioritize testing deterministic logic (e.g., Orchestration at 66% ) over the more bug-prone Intelligence compo-nents (47%). This gap identifies a need for contract-driven testing to secure framework-model integration. 

## 7 RQ4: Commonality & Association 

(a) Symptoms (b) Root Causes (c) Components 

Figure 3: Jensen-Shannon similarity between frameworks. 

7.0.1 Cross-framework Commonality. All studied frameworks ex-hibit high commonality, with pairwise similarity exceeding 0.75 

Table 5: Significant co-occurring category pairs. 

Relationship Category A Category B 𝑁 

Root Cause ×

Symptom Agent-specific Fault Unexp. State 14 Dependency/Environment Fault Build Failure 30 Root Cause ×

Component Agent-specific Fault Intelligence 44 Orchestration 32 Dependency/Environment Fault Infrastructure 21 General Programming Fault Action 52 Knowledge 44 Symptom ×

Component Build Failure Infrastructure 20 Incomplete/Incorrect Trace 6Unexp. Sequence Orchestration 12 Unexp. State 14 

for symptoms and 0.80 for root causes (Figure 3), supporting uni-fied defensive programming guidelines and testing benchmarks. At component level, similarity scores (0.62 – 0.81) are lower than for symptoms and root causes, reflecting divergent architectural priorities. For instance, LangChain’s lower similarity scores stem from its emphasis on Knowledge layer (Table 4). These patterns imply a layered quality assurance strategy: universal black-box or-acles can detect common symptoms, while white-box testing must target framework-specific bug-prone components (e.g., Knowledge in LangChain) to optimize diagnosis. 

Finding 4a: Bug symptoms, root causes, and component distribu-tions show substantial commonality (similarity 0.62–0.88) across frameworks, indicating recurring patterns rather than isolated cases. 

7.0.2 Inter-dimensional Relationships. Chi-squared tests confirm significant associations ( 𝑝 < 0.001 ) across all analyzed dimen-sion pairs, indicating that failure characteristics are interdepen-dent. Strongest associations involve Root Cause with Symptom Dissecting Bug Triggers and Failure Modes in Modern Agentic Frameworks: An Empirical Study ArXiv, March 2026, Online               

> 1# Element Config. Labels: Model:Backend, Model:ModelID
> 2client = OpenAIClient ( model ="gemini-1.5-flash")
> 3# Input Label: InputMessages
> 4messages = [
> 5SystemMessage (content="Say anything Start with 'FOO '"),
> 6SystemMessage (content="Say anything End with 'BAR '"),
> 7UserMessage(content="Just say '.'", source="user")]
> 8result = await client.create(messages=messages)

(a) AutoGen-6116             

> 1@tool # Element Config. Label: Tool:Signature
> 2def calculator( args: Dict[str, str] ):
> 3pass
> 45agent = create_react_agent(model, tools=[calculator])
> 6executor = AgentExecutor(agent, tools=[calculator])
> 7# Operation Label: TaskIntent:CalculationTask
> 8result = executor.invoke({"input": "10+25=?"})
> 9# Input Label: LLMResponse:ToolCallSchema
> 10 # Non-standard JSON formatting: "{ 'a':'10 ','b':'25 ','operator ':'+'}"

(b) LangChain-30910 

Figure 4: Simplified triggering scenarios with labels. 

(𝜒 2 = 241 .19 , 𝑉 = 0.384 ) and Component ( 𝜒 2 = 472 .56 , 𝑉 = 0.537 ), while the association between Symptom and Component is also sub-stantial ( 𝜒 2 = 171 .16 , 𝑉 = 0.289 ). Table 5 lists significant category pairs from post-hoc analysis ( 𝑁 denotes frequency). We omit pairs involving Others symptom or documentation-only issues, abbrevi-ating “Unexp. State” ( Unexpected Intermediate State ), and “Unexp. Sequence” ( Unexpected Execution Sequence ). These associations re-veal two failure patterns unique to agentic frameworks. First, faults in Orchestration components frequently manifest as Unexpected Intermediate State and Unexpected Execution Sequence , indi-cating that frameworks often fail to maintain state and sequence in-tegrity across complex topologies. For instance, in CrewAI-1463 [ 2 ], the workflow failed to handle multi-start configurations, leading to untracked execution paths [ 2]. Second, the association between Ac-tion/Knowledge components and General Programming Faults 

highlights a lack of defensive logic in deterministic components when handling edge cases triggered by LLM interactions. These relationships enable the design of symptom-based test oracles and targeted defensive mechanisms to mitigate the specific root causes. 

Finding 4b: Statistical analysis confirms significant associations among symptoms, root causes, and components. Granular category-level analysis reveals two core failure patterns: (1) Orchestration components frequently compromise state and sequence integrity, and (2) Action/Knowledge components often lack defensive logic against LLM-driven interactions. These relationships enable the design of symptom-based test oracles and defensive mechanisms to mitigate the specific root causes identified within each component. 

## 8 RQ5: Triggering Scenarios 

This section presents the list of frequent bug-triggering factors identified among 273 bugs. To analyze the vast combination of potential factors, we employ FP-growth (Section 3) to systematically mine patterns within each dimension. Note that factors are not mutually exclusive, as a single bug may involve multiple triggers. 

8.0.1 Element Configurations (251, 92%). Model (88, 35%): Model clients used to interface with LLMs. 

• Backend (55, 22%): The internal client class managing commu-nication protocols (e.g., OpenAIClient in Figure 4a). 

• ModelID (39, 16%): The specific LLM identifier executing the reasoning tasks (e.g., gemini-1.5-flash ). 

Tool (64, 25%): This enables agents to take actions. 

• BuiltinType (18, 7%): Pre-implemented tool classes providing ready-to-use actions (e.g., AzureAISearchTool in AutoGen). 

• Signature (16, 6%): The parameter types and return schema used by the framework to structure tool-calling prompts. 

Agent (38, 15%): Autonomous entities orchestrating reasoning and tool usage, characterized by role and planning logic. 

Team (30, 12%): High-level entities coordinating multi-agent col-laboration via hierarchical or flat organizational structures. 

CodeExecutor (17, 7%): It manages the execution environment for generated code snippets. For example, ExecutorType that includes runtime backend for execution (e.g., local or remote executors). 

Store (15, 6%): Data persistence and indexing, with frequent at-tribute Backend representing underlying database or file system. 

8.0.2 Input Characteristics (56, 21%). Characteristics of user re-quests or model outputs that trigger faults. 

TaskIntent (19, 34%): Abstract patterns representing the func-tional goal of a request. 

• MultiToolCallTask (5, 9%): Requests for orchestrating multiple tool or agent calls. In SmolAgents-1481, a prompt to “launch two web search agents in parallel” exposed greedy behavior in the manager agent, causing incomplete answers [8]. 

• MultimodalTask (5, 9%): Tasks involving non-textual data (e.g., images), provided either as input or generated as tool outputs. 

LLMResponse (12, 21%): Patterns in model outputs that deviate from framework expectations. 

• ToolCallSchema (6, 11%): Atypical or malformed tool call mes-sages that bypass parsers. In Figure 4b (Line 10), the LLM gener-ates a non-standard JSON string for the arguments field, leading to parsing failures and subsequent invocation errors. 

• RegularSchema (5, 9%): Flaws or non-determinism in standard text responses that break downstream logic (e.g., non-deterministic text formats in LangChain-8716 [1]). 

InputMessages (11, 20%): Structural or formatting features of the message history, such as multiple system messages in Figure 4a. 

Code (8, 14%): Specific patterns in code snippets that expose ex-ecution environment limitations. In SmolAgents-839, chained as-signments crashed the LocalPythonExecutor .

8.0.3 Operations (101, 37%). Bug-triggering runtime actions. 

CallTool (24, 24%): Framework invocations of external tools. 

ExportComponent (16, 16%), LoadComponent (7, 7%): Opera-tions for serializing and restoring framework entities, such as state corruption in the dump or load_component [22]. 

ExecCode (11, 11%): Dynamic execution of generated code within framework-managed sandboxes. 

ConsecutiveExec (8, 8%): Repeated execution of the same task or instance. In AutoGen-6746 [ 9 ] residual state from previous runs corrupts the context, causing subsequent calls to fail. 

ProcessDoc (7, 7%): Utility operations for handling external docu-ments, such as batch indexing (e.g., LangChain-32272 [16]). 

8.0.4 Analysis. Element configurations (92%) are the primary bug triggers, with Model (35%) settings dominating. Pattern mining identifies a notable combination (8%) where bugs emerge only from specific Backend and ModelID settings, forming a a typical pit-fall. As shown in Fig. 4a, the AutoGen-6116 bug was triggered by ArXiv, March 2026, Online Xiaowen Zhang, Hannuo Zhang, and Shin Hwei Tan 

the OpenAIClient and gemini-1.5-flash combination, exposing flaws in model-specific message transformation [ 11 ]. For higher-level elements like Agent (15%) and Team (12%), triggering factors are more dispersed, with no single attribute exceeding 5%. 

Finding 5a: Most bug-triggering scenarios involve element con-figurations (92%), especially model settings. Our pattern mining technique reveals that 8% arising from specific model backend and ID combinations. These common element-attribute pairs can priori-tize test generation for high-risk configurations to expose bugs. 

For input characteristics, TaskIntent (34%) and LLMResponse (21%) dominate. The former reveals that complex functional goals, such as MultiToolCallTask (9%), often expose flaws in orchestra-tion logic. The latter, specifically ToolCallSchema (11%), shows that frameworks struggle with atypical output formats from LLMs, leading to parsing failures. For operations, CallTool (24%) and Ex-portComponent (16%) are the most bug-prone execution paths. The former is typically triggered indirectly via task intents, exposing vul-nerabilities in tool-integration logic, while the latter reveals flaws in state serialization and isolation during component migration. 

Finding 5b: (1) Common input characteristics include complex task intents (34%), irregular LLM response schemas (21%), and message features (20%), which provide a roadmap for enhancing robustness through input-driven testing and formal validation. (2) Bug-prone operations involves tool/code integration (CallTool 24%, ExecCode 11%) and component migration (ExportComponent 16%, LoadCom-ponent 7%), which should be prioritized during test generation. 

## 9 RQ6: Transferability 

We found 16 of 35 source bugs (46%) are transferable, yielding 29 issues: 4 Duplicates, 11 Adapted, and 14 Variants, with no single-framework concentration. Collectively, Duplicates and Adapted cases account for over half of transfers, indicating many functional counterparts across frameworks. This suggests that test cases from one framework can serve as reliable oracles for others. Furthermore, Variants show that even when direct reproduction fails, core trigger-ing patterns generalize across components to uncover latent faults. Overall, these findings support cross-framework test generation, using existing bug patterns as effective validation templates. We submitted 11 bug reports, all of which were acknowledged by maintainers or community contributors, confirming that our transferability analysis effectively exposes meaningful functional discrepancies. Specifically, one was fixed, six received community acknowledgment via reproductions or fixes, and four were rec-ognized by maintainers as design boundaries or addressed with alternative solutions. While resolutions vary by framework design, these reports triggered significant technical engagement. For ex-ample, we adapted a serialization bug from AutoGen-6855 [ 23 ]to LangChain-34925 [ 26 ], where AI messages in chat history lost type-specific fields like tool call details. Maintainers acknowledged the issue but suggested migrating to newer memory abstractions in LangGraph, illustrating how transferred bugs surface valid yet complex design trade-offs. These outcomes show that our cross-framework transfers effectively uncover community-recognized faults across diverse implementations. 

Finding 6: Near half of sampled bugs are transferable across frame-works as adapted functional counterparts or generalized variants. It highlights that existing bug-triggering patterns provide effective templates for cross-framework validation. 

## 10 Discussion 

We discuss the practical implication of our study below: 

Recurring Bug Triggering Scenario for Test Generation. Our study reveals several recurring bug triggering scenarios involving el-ement configurations, especially model settings (Finding 5a). These common element-attribute pairs provide actionable guidelines for test generation, enabling automated construction of high-risk con-figurations to systematically expose bugs in agentic frameworks. 

From Code Correctness to Interaction Correctness. Failures in agentic frameworks often appear as semantic malfunctions such as incorrect execution sequences rather than traditional software crashes. This shift indicates that standard code correctness is insuf-ficient for system reliability. We recommend implementing state-driven monitors to track interaction flows and provide immediate feedback when behaviors deviate from intended orchestration. 

Establishing Cross-Framework Reliability Standards. High transferability proves that many defects are recurring issues shared across agentic frameworks. This suggests that the community should prioritize framework-agnostic benchmarks over fixing bugs in iso-lation. Shared patterns serve as effective templates, helping devel-opers identify recurring bugs early in the development lifecycle. 

Automated Maintenance of Executable Documentation. Ob-solete example code is a persistent source of errors, as rapid API evolution often outpaces documentation updates. Without auto-mated validation, code samples may mislead users who often rely on them as templates. Future research should prioritize synchro-nization tools that automatically verify the functional correctness of examples whenever the underlying framework changes. 

## 11 Threats to Validity 

We identify three threats to validity. First, subjective bias in manual annotation was mitigated through a multi-author coding process, achieving high inter-annotator agreement with Cohen’s kappa scores exceeding 0.89. Second, to ensure generalizability, we ana-lyzed 409 fixed bugs across five frameworks representing diverse architectural paradigms, ensuring the results reflect the broader ecosystem. Finally, to prevent misclassification of framework-level bugs, we applied a three-tier definition (task, application, and frame-work bugs) to isolate internal defects and exclusively examined confirmed fixes from official repositories. 

## 12 Conclusions 

This empirical study analyzes 409 fixed bugs across five modern agentic frameworks. We introduce a five-layer architectural abstrac-tion and a specialized taxonomy to categorize novel symptoms and agent-specific root causes, such as unexpected execution sequences and model-related faults. Our analysis uncovers a critical valida-tion gap where the bug-prone Intelligence layer receives the least testing. Our study further explores framework commonality and identifies statistically significant associations among symptoms, causes, and components, indicating recurring failure structures. Dissecting Bug Triggers and Failure Modes in Modern Agentic Frameworks: An Empirical Study ArXiv, March 2026, Online 

Finally, we identify frequent bug-triggering conditions and reveal their cross-framework transferability. This work establishes a foun-dation for contract-aware testing and cross-framework benchmarks to support robust agentic system development. 

Data Availability Statement. Our data is available at [29]. ArXiv, March 2026, Online Xiaowen Zhang, Hannuo Zhang, and Shin Hwei Tan 

## References 

[1] 2023. Add improved sources splitting in BaseQAWithSourcesChain. https://github .com/langchain-ai/langchain/pull/8716 [2] 2024. [BUG] Flow @listen with _and error. https://github.com/crewAIInc/crewA I/issues/1463 [3] 2024. Exceptions in Orleans storage. https://github.com/microsoft/autogen/issue s/4490 [4] 2025. Agentic AI: Comparing New Open-Source Frameworks . https://www.ilsilfve rskiold.com/articles/agentic-aI-comparing-new-open-source-frameworks [5] 2025. AzureAISearchTool Not working as expected. https://github.com/microsoft /autogen/issues/6308 [6] 2025. [BUG] Authentication Error When Using OpenAI Compatible LLMs. https: //github.com/crewAIInc/crewAI/issues/2647 [7] 2025. [BUG] Error when using ToolCallingAgent as manager. https://github.com /huggingface/smolagents/issues/606 [8] 2025. [Bug] Final answer is too greedy in ToolCallingAgent parallel calls. https: //github.com/huggingface/smolagents/issues/1481 [9] 2025. Bug: GraphFlow with termination condition automatically ends after first query. https://github.com/microsoft/autogen/issues/6746 [10] 2025. [BUG] Tool validation with executor type defined. https://github.com/huggi ngface/smolagents/issues/913 [11] 2025. Could not send Multiple system message at autogen. https://github.com/mic rosoft/autogen/issues/6116 [12] 2025. CrewAI . https://github.com/crewAIInc/crewAI [13] 2025. Customized ChatAgentContainer not support. https://github.com/microsoft /autogen/issues/6730 [14] 2025. It seems that num_gpu does not work with ollama models. https://github.c om/langchain-ai/langchain/issues/32059 [15] 2025. LangChain . https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain [16] 2025. LangChain Indexing API: Incorrect num_skipped Count Due to Missing Within-Batch Deduplication Tracking. https://github.com/langchain-ai/langcha in/issues/32272 [17] 2025. LangGraph . https://github.com/langchain-ai/langgraph [18] 2025. LLMCallEvent fails to log “tools” to be chosen from by the LLM in BaseOpe-nAIChatCompletionClient. https://github.com/microsoft/autogen/issues/6531 [19] 2025. LocalCommandLineCodeExecutor to support PowerShell. https://github.com /microsoft/autogen/issues/5518 [20] 2025. Planning step can make next ActionStep miss its start. https://github.com/h uggingface/smolagents/issues/1097 [21] 2025. Runtime context is not being passed to the subgraph. https://github.com/lan gchain-ai/langgraph/issues/5700 [22] 2025. Some agents do not deserialize model_context (set to None or Do not serialize too). https://github.com/microsoft/autogen/issues/6336 [23] 2025. Structured logging is missing data from Trace logging (0.6.4). https://github .com/microsoft/autogen/issues/6855 [24] 2025. Unable to handle inconsistent tool call indices with streaming output when using Qwen3. https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain/issues/31511 [25] 2025. Workflow with multiple cycles stop execute. https://github.com/microsoft/a utogen/issues/6710 [26] 2026. AIMessage.tool_calls lost during serialization in InMemoryChatMessageHis-tory. https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain/issues/34925 [27] 2026. Haystack . https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack [28] 2026. LiteLLM . https://pypi.org/project/litellm [29] Anonymous. 2026. Understanding Bugs in Modern Agentic Frameworks (Artifact). https://zenodo.org/records/19228789. [30] Junjie Chen, Yihua Liang, Qingchao Shen, Jiajun Jiang, and Shuochuan Li. 2023. Toward Understanding Deep Learning Framework Bugs. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 32, 6, Article 135 (Sept. 2023), 31 pages. doi:10.1145/3587155 [31] Jacob Cohen. 2013. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . routledge. [32] Hana Derouiche, Zaki Brahmi, and Haithem Mazeni. 2025. Agentic ai frameworks: Architectures, protocols, and design challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10146 

(2025). [33] Jiawei Han, Jian Pei, Yiwen Yin, and Runying Mao. 2004. Mining frequent patterns without candidate generation: A frequent-pattern tree approach. Data mining and knowledge discovery 8, 1 (2004), 53–87. [34] Mohammed Mehedi Hasan, Hao Li, Emad Fallahzadeh, Gopi Krishnan Rajbahadur, Bram Adams, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2025. An empirical study of testing practices in open source AI agent frameworks and agentic applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.19185 (2025). [35] Niful Islam, Ragib Shahriar Ayon, Deepak George Thomas, Shibbir Ahmed, and Mohammad Wardat. 2026. When Agents Fail: A Comprehensive Study of Bugs in LLM Agents with Automated Labeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.15232 (2026). [36] Zhenmin Li, Lin Tan, Xuanhui Wang, Shan Lu, Yuanyuan Zhou, and Chengxiang Zhai. 2006. Have things changed now? an empirical study of bug characteristics in modern open source software. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Architectural and System Support for Improving Software Dependability (San Jose, California) 

(ASID ’06) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 25–33. doi:10.1145/1181309.1181314 [37] Daniel Liu, Krishna Upadhyay, Vinaik Chhetri, A.B. Siddique, and Umar Farooq. 2025. A Large-Scale Study on the Development and Issues of Multi-Agent AI Systems. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData) . 7785–7792. doi:10.1109/BigData66926.2025.11402104 [38] Jerry Liu. 2022. LlamaIndex . doi:10.5281/zenodo.1234 [39] Mugeng Liu, Siqi Zhong, Weichen Bi, Yixuan Zhang, Zhiyang Chen, Zhenpeng Chen, Xuanzhe Liu, and Yun Ma. 2026. A First Look at Bugs in LLM Inference Engines. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. (Jan. 2026). doi:10.1145/3788873 Just Accepted. [40] Ruofan Lu, Yichen Li, and Yintong Huo. 2025. Exploring Autonomous Agents: A Closer Look at Why They Fail When Completing Tasks. In 2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . 3856–3860. doi:10.1109/ASE63991.2025.00330 [41] M.L. Menéndez, J.A. Pardo, L. Pardo, and M.C. Pardo. 1997. The Jensen-Shannon divergence. Journal of the Franklin Institute 334, 2 (1997), 307–318. doi:10.1016/ S0016-0032(96)00063-4 [42] Melissa Z Pan, Mert Cemri, Lakshya A Agrawal, Shuyi Yang, Bhavya Chopra, Rishabh Tiwari, Kurt Keutzer, Aditya Parameswaran, Kannan Ramchandran, Dan Klein, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Matei Zaharia, and Ion Stoica. 2025. Why Do Multiagent Systems Fail?. In ICLR 2025 Workshop on Building Trust in Language Models and Applications . https://openreview.net/forum?id=wM521FqPvI [43] Rui Ren, Jinheng Li, Yan Yin, and Shuai Tian. 2021. Failure Prediction for Large-Scale Clusters Logs via Mining Frequent Patterns. In Intelligent Computing and Block Chain , Wanling Gao, Kai Hwang, Changyun Wang, Weiping Li, Zhigang Qiu, Lei Wang, Aoying Zhou, Weining Qian, Cheqing Jin, and Zhifei Zhang (Eds.). Springer Singapore, Singapore, 147–165. [44] Aymeric Roucher, Albert Villanova del Moral, Thomas Wolf, Leandro von Werra, and Erik Kaunismäki. 2025. Smolagents: a smol library to build great agentic systems. https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents. [45] Guogen Shan and Shawn Gerstenberger. 2017. Fisher’s exact approach for post hoc analysis of a chi-squared test. PloS one 12, 12 (2017), e0188709. [46] Qingchao Shen, Haoyang Ma, Junjie Chen, Yongqiang Tian, Shing-Chi Cheung, and Xiang Chen. 2021. A comprehensive study of deep learning compiler bugs. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Athens, Greece) (ESEC/FSE 2021) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 968–980. doi:10.1145/3468264.3468591 [47] Susana M. Vieira, Uzay Kaymak, and João M. C. Sousa. 2010. Cohen’s kappa coef-ficient as a performance measure for feature selection. In International Conference on Fuzzy Systems . 1–8. doi:10.1109/FUZZY.2010.5584447 [48] Haibo Wang, Zhuolin Xu, Huaien Zhang, Nikolaos Tsantalis, and Shin Hwei Tan. 2025. Towards Understanding Refactoring Engine Bugs. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. (July 2025). doi:10.1145/3747289 Just Accepted. [49] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2024. AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling . https://openreview.net/forum?id=BAakY1hNKS [50] Yiheng Xiong, Mengqian Xu, Ting Su, Jingling Sun, Jue Wang, He Wen, Geguang Pu, Jifeng He, and Zhendong Su. 2023. An Empirical Study of Functional Bugs in Android Apps. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Seattle, WA, USA) (ISSTA 2023) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1319–1331. doi:10.1145/3597926.35 98138 [51] Ziluo Xue, Yanjie Zhao, Shenao Wang, Kai Chen, and Haoyu Wang. 2025. A Characterization Study of Bugs in LLM Agent Workflow Orchestration Frame-works. In 2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . 3369–3380. doi:10.1109/ASE63991.2025.00278 [52] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .[53] Daojuan Zhang, Tianqi Wu, Xiaoming Zhou, Bo Hu, and Wenjie Zhang. 2024. Multi-source System Log Behavior Pattern Mining Method Based on FP-Growth. In Proceedings of the 2023 International Conference on Communication Network and Machine Learning (Zhengzhou, China) (CNML ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 248–254. doi:10.1145/3640912.3640961 [54] Huaien Zhang, Yu Pei, Shuyun Liang, and Shin Hwei Tan. 2024. Understanding and Detecting Annotation-Induced Faults of Static Analyzers. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1, FSE, Article 33 (July 2024), 23 pages. doi:10.1145/3643759