Title: ActivityEditor: Learning to Synthesize Physically Valid Human Mobility

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.05529v2

Published Time: Mon, 13 Apr 2026 00:33:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# ActivityEditor: Learning to Synthesize Physically Valid Human Mobility 

Chengjie Yang 1, Yutian Jiang 2, Anqi Liang 3, Wei Qi 4, Chenyu Wu 1, ∗, Junbo Zhang 5, †

> 1

Southwest Jiaotong University, 2HKUST (Guangzhou), 3Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 

> 4

Tsinghua University, 5JD Technology 

3335028104@my.swjtu.edu.cn , yjiang194@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn ,

{anqiliang9657, chenywu60}@gmail.com ,

qiw@tsinghua.edu.cn , msjunbozhang@outlook.com *

Abstract 

Human mobility modeling is indispensable for diverse urban applications. However, exist-ing data-driven methods often suffer from data scarcity, limiting their applicability in regions where historical trajectories are unavailable or restricted. To bridge this gap, we propose Ac-tivityEditor , a novel dual-LLM-agent frame-work designed for zero-shot cross-regional tra-jectory generation. Our framework decom-poses the complex synthesis task into two col-laborative stages. Specifically, an intention-based agent, which leverages demographic-driven priors to generate structured human in-tentions and coarse activity chains to ensure high-level socio-semantic coherence. These outputs are then refined by editor agent to ob-tain mobility trajectories through iteratively re-visions that enforces human mobility law. This capability is acquired through reinforcement learning with multiple rewards grounded in real-world physical constraints, allowing the agent to internalize mobility regularities and en-sure high-fidelity trajectory generation. Exten-sive experiments demonstrate that ActivityEd-itor achieves superior zero-shot performance when transferred across diverse urban contexts. It maintains high statistical fidelity and physi-cal validity, providing a robust and highly gen-eralizable solution for mobility simulation in data-scarce scenarios. Our code is available at: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ ActivityEditor-066B .

1 Introduction 

Human mobility modeling is a cornerstone of mod-ern urban intelligence, providing critical insights for a wide spectrum of real-world applications, in-cluding map services (Ye et al., 2011), logistics dis-patching (Wen et al., 2024), urban planning (Zheng et al., 2023), and public safety monitoring (Gao et al., 2017). Despite its significance, the efficacy of   

> *∗Lead corresponding author. †Corresponding author.

these applications is heavily predicated on the avail-ability of high-fidelity trajectory data. In practice, obtaining such data is increasingly challenging due to data scarcity arising from factors such as distri-bution shifts in evolving urban environments(Feng et al., 2020) and the “cold-start” problem in newly planned areas where historical records have yet to be generated(He et al., 2020). Coupled with strin-gent privacy regulations(Gong et al., 2025), this vacuum of mobility data has become a significant bottleneck, hindering the deployment of intelligent urban services. In recent years, deep learning-based models (Long et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Yuan et al., 2022) have been widely applied to mobility syn-thesis, achieving promising results by capturing high-order transition dynamics and mining shared mobility patterns among users. However, these data-driven approaches suffer from several key drawbacks. First, their success heavily relies on the collection of large-scale private mobility data, which is often inaccessible due to stringent privacy regulations. Second, such models are inherently data-hungry and struggle to generalize in zero-shot settings, where historical trajectories for a target region are entirely absent. Finally, the prediction accuracy remains limited by the constrained se-quential modeling capabilities of traditional archi-tectures and a conspicuous lack of deep understand-ing regarding human daily commonsense. While recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise in preliminary mobility prediction(Wang et al., 2023b; Feng et al., 2025b) and synthesis(Shao et al., 2024; Du et al., 2025), they continue to face critical bottlenecks. Specifically, most existing LLM-based methods still require partial local trajectories to perceive re-gional patterns, hindering their application in strict zero-shot scenarios. Furthermore, these methods typically rely on single-pass generation architec-tures that lack self-correction or auditing mecha-

> arXiv:2604.05529v2 [cs.AI] 10 Apr 2026

nisms, often leading to spatio-temporal inconsisten-cies and violations of physical laws in real-world environments. We propose ActivityEditor, a dual-agent frame-work designed for high-fidelity, zero-shot mobility synthesis. Our approach is grounded in the in-sight that while urban functional indicators and population-level metrics vary across cities, the underlying mapping between socio-demographic characteristics and human intentions remains in-variant(Evidence can be seen in Appendix A.1). ActivityEditor takes individual profiles as input and decomposes the synthesis process into two collaborative stages. In the Intention-driven Gen-eration stage, an agent leverages demographic pri-ors to derive structured intentions and construct a coarse activity skeleton. This is followed by Rule-constrained Refinement, where an Editor agent it-eratively enforces human mobility laws via "Add, Delete, Shift, and Replace" operations to estab-lish logical consistency and rectify spatio-temporal ungrounding. To ensure the reliability of this re-finement, we utilize Group Relative Policy Opti-mization (GRPO) to align the agent with real-world physical regularities. This enables the model to au-tonomously internalize physical laws and correct latent cognitive biases regarding human movement, allowing ActivityEditor to perform robust zero-shot generation in entirely unseen target cities by learn-ing a universal logic of trajectory refinement. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We define and address the challenge of zero-shot human mobility synthesis, enabling the generation of realistic trajectories starting solely from socio-demographic profiles. This approach effectively bypasses the dependency on private historical data and provides a scal-able solution for the “cold-start” problem in newly planned urban areas. • We propose ActivityEditor, a novel dual-LLM-agent framework that treats mobility synthesis as an iterative “Generate-then-Edit” task. By decomposing the process into intention-driven generation and rule-constrained refinement, and further employing GRPO for physical-law alignment, we establish a self-correcting mechanism that ensures both semantic coher-ence and spatio-temporal validity. • Extensive experiments across diverse urban scenarios demonstrate that ActivityEditor sig-nificantly outperforms state-of-the-art base-lines. Our results confirm the model’s supe-rior zero-shot generalizability, achieving re-markable improvements in physical consis-tency and statistical fidelity without requiring any local trajectory data for the target regions. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Mobility Modeling 

Existing research can be categorized into mobility prediction and mobility synthesis. Early methods in both fields primarily utilized deep learning ar-chitectures, such as RNNs and GANs, to capture spatiotemporal dynamics (Gao et al., 2019; Feng et al., 2018; Song et al., 2016; Feng et al., 2020). However, these statistical approaches often struggle to incorporate high-level semantic knowledge, lead-ing to suboptimal performance in complex urban scenarios. To bridge this gap, recent studies have integrated Large Language Models (LLMs) to en-hance predictive capabilities (Li et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2023b; Zhong et al., 2025; Feng et al., 2024) and generative fidelity (Wang et al., 2024b; Shao et al., 2024).Meanwhile, emerging LLM-based mo-bility generation frameworks (Wang et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2024, 2026; Wu et al., 2024) have further explored agent-centric, profile-conditioned, and city-aware simulation paradigms, improving the realism and personalization of synthetic travel di-aries and activity chains (Amin et al., 2025; Li et al., 2024b). Despite their semantic depth, these methods ex-hibit significant limitations in zero-shot generaliza-tion and physical consistency. Most LLM-based models still exhibit sensitivity to local data distri-butions or require few-shot samples to perceive re-gional patterns (Feng et al., 2025b; Han et al., 2025; Li and Lim, 2025). Crucially, current paradigms are predominantly single-pass (forward-only) archi-tectures that lack self-correction or auditing mech-anisms. This often leads to spatio-temporal incon-sistencies, such as violations of travel velocity con-straints or logical gaps in activity chains. Unlike these approaches, ActivityEditor treats mobility modeling as an iterative "generate-then-edit" task, aligning synthetic trajectories with physical laws and human commonsense through a dual-agent re-finement process. 2.2 LLM and Agentic Reinforcement Learning 

Post-training alignment has evolved from Re-inforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022) to more efficient paradigms like Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023). Recently, Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Guo et al., 2025) and its variants, such as DAPO (Yu et al., 2025), have emerged to enhance complex reason-ing by normalizing rewards within sample groups without explicit value functions,and have further in-spired multi-turn agent reinforcement learning with finer-grained turn-level optimization and reward design (Zeng et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2025). Transi-tioning toward Agentic RL, research frames LLMs as autonomous decision-makers that optimize long-horizon trajectories through environment feedback (Zhang et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025; Qi et al., 2024). Unlike standard alignment, agentic ap-proaches emphasize iterative self-correction and tool-use reasoning(Feng et al., 2025a; Wang et al., 2025; Dong et al., 2025). ActivityEditor advances this by integrating GRPO-based alignment into a dual-agent "generate-then-edit" framework, en-abling the autonomous internalization of physical regularities for zero-shot mobility synthesis. 

3 Preliminary 

We define the zero-shot mobility synthesis task and related concepts for use in the following section. 

Socio-demographic Attributes: For each agent 

i, we define their background as a set of K at-tributes, denoted by Di = {d1,i , d 2,i , . . . , d K,i }.These attributes encompass both individual-level demographics (e.g., age, gender, employment) and household-level descriptors (e.g., income, house-hold size, vehicle ownership), serving as the initial prompt seeds for mobility generation. 

Human Intention: Distinct from prior works, we introduce the concept of latent intention to bridge demographics and behaviors. Let In,i ∈ V I

be the underlying motivation (e.g., sustenance , ed-ucation , recreation ) for the n-th activity of agent 

i. An intention chain is defined as a time-ordered sequence: Ii = {I1,i , I 2,i , . . . , I n,i }.

Activity and Activity Chain: An individual activity An,i is defined as a tuple [Tn,i , S n,i , E n,i ],where Tn,i denotes the activity type (semantic cat-egory), while Sn,i and En,i represent the start and end times, respectively. An activity chain 

Ai = {A1,i , A 2,i , . . . , A n,i } represents the com-plete sequence of events for agent i over a 24-hour period. 

Mobility Trajectory: The final syn-thetic trajectory T raj i is expressed as a sequence of activity-location pairs: 

T raj i = {(A1,i , Z 1,i ), . . . , (An,i , Z n,i )}, where 

Zn,i denotes the zone-level location (e.g., Trans-portation Analysis Zone, TAZ) where the activity occurs. 

Zero-shot Mobility Synthesis: Given a set of socio-demographic attributes Di from an unseen target region Rtest , the objective is to learn a gen-erative mapping M : Di → T raj i. The model 

M must achieve high statistical fidelity and physi-cal validity without having observed any historical trajectory samples from Rtest during the training phase. 

4 Methods 

4.1 Overview 

As illustrated in Figure 1, A CTIVITY EDITOR com-prises two core modules: the Intention-Driven Agent and the Editor Agent. Serving as the se-mantic architect, the Intention-Driven Agent is designed to induce the Socio-Semantic Prior by mapping demographic profiles into a activity draft. To rectify inherent Mobility Biases and instill an explicit awareness of spatio-temporal regularities, the Editor Agent functions as a refinement mod-ule that performs Add, Delete, Shift, and Replace operations. While the Intention-Driven Agent op-erates in a zero-shot manner to preserve universal behavioral priors, the Editor Agent is specifically optimized through a two-stage training pipeline involving SFT and GRPO to ensure the final syn-thesis achieves both socio-semantic coherence and strict physical validity. Detailed prompt templates and task-specific instructions for both agents are provided in Appendix A.3.4. 

4.2 Intention-driven Agent 

The Intention-driven Agent induces the Socio-Semantic Prior, defined as the cross-regionally sim-ilar mapping between demographics and behavioral intentions. While urban functional indicators vary, the underlying logic linking user profiles to inten-tions remains consistent. By leveraging a frozen LLM as a world model, the agent infers latent inten-tions directly from user profiles to generate foun-dational human mobility patterns. National Household    

> Travel Survey Dataset
> User Persona
> ID, Age, Occupation…
> Intention -
> Driven
> Agent
> Daily Schedule
> Output as Ground Truth (Schedule)
> Input :User Persona
> Editor
> Agent
> (SFT)
> Group Advantage
> Inherit
> Question
> Thinking
> Roll -out
> Update

Reward Model 

Data Generation Supervised Finetuning GRPO -Reinforcement Learning 

> You are a daily schedule editor. Given a
> person's profile, daily context, constraints,
> and a draft schedule , revise the draft.

𝑂 ! 𝑂 " 𝑂 #

𝐴 ! 𝐴 " 𝐴 #                                   

> Editor
> Agent
> (RL)
> {“teacher_trace ”:
> “checks” :
> [ {“item”: …, “message”: }, …],
> “diff_vs_gt_style ”:
> [{“type”: …, “message”: }, …],
> …}
> {"final_schedule ":
> [{"activity": …, “time”: …]
> ...}
> Output CoT and Format
> •Use ONLY these activity types .
> •NO gaps and NO overlaps .
> •Exact HH:MM time format.
> •Durations should realistic.
> •Asimple and realistic schedule .
> •......
> Constraints
> •If covers all day.
> •If continuous between slots.
> •If durations is suitable.
> Schedule Similarity
> •Time Slots
> •Activity Types
> •Activity Duration
> Output Format: Contain thought and output
> •Age range
> •Gender
> •Race
> •Education
> •Occupation
> •Activity
> •Schedule
> •Distance
> {“reasoning” :”explanation”,
> “schedule” :
> [ {“activity”: “home”, “time”: 7:00 -10:00 }, …]
> }

Figure 1: Overview of the A CTIVITY EDITOR framework. 

Input Normalization. The agent receives a struc-tured user profile Di, comprising K diverse at-tributes such as age_range , employment_status ,

relationship , and primary_activity .

Skeleton Generation. Upon receiving Di, the agent initiates a reasoning trace within the thought space to infer the user’s latent intention, denoted as VI . By leveraging its parametric knowledge of population clustering and behavioral patterns, the agent articulates the rationale behind the user’s daily demands. For example, if a user profile indicates primary_activity = “Retired” , the agent may explicitly reason that “the user is re-tired and therefore does not require a daily work commute.”Guided by these inferred intentions, the agent constructs a preliminary draft schedule, de-noted as Sdraft . This draft establishes the chronolog-ical order of the activity chain and allocates rough temporal intervals. 

4.3 Editor Agent 

The Editor Agent acts as a rule-based optimizer to bridge the gap between abstract intentions and physical reality. While the Intention-driven Agent ensures semantic logic, the resulting Sdraft may fail to satisfy the underlying spatio-temporal con-straints of human mobility. The Editor Agent specifically injects explicit mobility regularities to rectify the spatio-temporal ungrounding inherent in LLMs. By functioning as a rule-aware auditor, it transforms these coarse drafts into strictly valid tra-jectories by enforcing rigorous physical and logical boundaries. 

Constraint Checking. The agent first acts as a rigorous “critic” within the <Thought> space, com-prehensively auditing the draft to identify any vi-olations of predefined rules. As illustrated in the “Reward Model” module of Figure 1, these con-straints are formalized into two major categories: 

1) Hard Constraints. These are strictly en-forced rules that ensure the fundamental mathe-matical and structural validity of the trajectory: • Physical Constraints: Absolute spatiotempo-ral boundaries. For example, the activity chain seamlessly cover a complete 24-hour period. • Logical Constraints: Inherent structural and state-transition mandates. Consecutive seg-ments in the schedule must represent distinct states; transitioning directly from one activity to the exact same activity type is structurally invalid and must be merged into a single con-tinuous segment. 

2) Soft Constraints. These act as heuristic guidelines to evaluate the behavioral realism, so-cioeconomic alignment, and profile consistency of the sequence: • Commonsense Constraints: Alignment with socio-demographic profiles. For example, a user explicitly profiled as retired should not be assigned regular, prolonged work activities. • Temporal Constraints: Plausible duration boundaries for specific activities. For exam-ple, while sleeping or working can naturally take several hours, a drop-off/pick-up or ser-vice event should be relatively brief and can-not unrealistically span half a day. • Coherence Constraints: Macroscopic se-quence rationality. This prevents excessive temporal fragmentation, such as alternating between home and shopping every 10 minutes, thereby ensuring smooth and logical activity transitions. 

Action and Iterative Refinement. Upon detect-ing any of the aforementioned violations, the agent triggers an internal ReAct loop(Yao et al., 2022). It selects specific editing operations from a pre-defined action space to locally modify the draft. These operations include A DD (inserting missing activities), D ELETE (removing irrational events), SHIFT (adjusting start/end times to resolve over-laps), R EPLACE (swapping contextually inappro-priate activities), and S PLIT (dividing excessively long activities proportionally). After each execu-tion, the agent re-evaluates the updated schedule until all conflicts are resolved. Once it confirms that the schedule satisfies all spatiotemporal and physical rules, the agent outputs the finalized, high-fidelity JSON-structured trajectory. 

4.4 Training Strategy 

Our training pipeline, comprising SFT and GRPO, is designed to systematically eliminate the latent Mobility Bias and hallucinations of pre-trained LLMs. This process replaces noisy, sparse inter-nal representations with verified domain knowl-edge, allowing the Editor Agent to internalize the fundamental laws of human movement. Through this two-stage alignment, the model shifts from generic reasoning to a precise, rule-governed cog-nitive model of mobility. 

Data Generation. Real-world human mobility datasets, such as travel surveys, exclusively record the final executed trajectories. They inherently lack the intermediate cognitive processes of plan-ning, constraint checking, and conflict resolution. To bridge this gap and construct a training cor-pus for the editing mechanism, we employ a powerful teacher model, GPT-5.2, to perform a reverse-engineering task. Specifically, we sup-ply the teacher model with the user demographic profile, the flawed preliminary draft generated by the Intention-driven Agent, and the corresponding ground-truth schedule. Tasked with mapping the draft to the ground truth, the teacher model infers a highly detailed Chain-of-Thought trace. This trace explicitly articulates the step-by-step logic required to identify temporal overlaps or common-sense violations in the draft, along with the precise refinement operations needed to correct them. Con-sequently, we successfully synthesize the missing cognitive traces, creating high-quality paired data of reasoning processes and structural outputs. 

Supervised Fine-Tuning. Utilizing the synthe-sized reasoning dataset, we perform supervised fine-tuning to initialize the student model as the Ed-itor Agent. This phase is fundamentally designed to solve the cold-start problem inherent in complex generation tasks. By training strictly on the paired thought traces and the final JSON formats, the stu-dent model acquires foundational domain knowl-edge regarding human mobility patterns. More im-portantly, it learns the specific structural paradigm of self-critique. The model masters how to prop-erly open a thought space, sequentially propose editing actions such as adding, deleting, or shifting activities, and ultimately output a rigidly formatted JSON trajectory. 

GRPO-Reinforcement Learning. To transcend mere data imitation and deeply internalize physi-cal laws, we introduce GRPO in the second phase. Given a user profile, the policy model parallelly performs roll-outs to generate a group of candidate schedules. Subsequently, a programmatic, rule-based reward model evaluates these outputs with-out human-in-the-loop intervention. The composite reward is formulated through three explicit dimen-sions: 

Formatting Reward ( Rfmt ): This ensures ad-herence to the “Generate-then-Edit” paradigm. It assigns scores based on the presence of the reason-ing process ( [THOUGHT] ) and the structured output ([JSON] ): 

Rfmt =



1.0, if both [THOUGHT] and [JSON] exist 

0.5, if only one tag exists 

0.0, otherwise (1) 

Constraint Reward ( Rcon ): This validates the physical feasibility of the trajectory. Let S =

{(s1, e 1), (s2, e 2), . . . , (sN , e N )} denote the gen-erated schedule containing N segments, where si

and ei are the start and end times in minutes. Rcon is the average of three Boolean checks: 

Rcon = 13

 Ifull + Icont + Idur 

 (2) where Ifull ensures full-day coverage; Icont enforces temporal continuity without gaps or overlaps; and 

Idur constrains each activity duration to a realistic physiological range. 

Fidelity Reward ( Rsim ): This evaluates the statistical realism of the generated sequence com-pared to standard mobility patterns. It combines the token-level accuracy (Acc), Macro-F1 score, and the Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) of ac-tivity type distributions ( pact ) and interval length distributions ( pint ): 

Rsim = 0 .40 · Acc + 0 .10 · F1 macro 

+ 0 .25 ·  1 − JSD (pact gen ∥ pact gt )

+ 0 .25 ·  1 − JSD (pint gen ∥ pint gt ) (3) where pgen and pgt denote the probability distri-butions of the generated schedule and the ground truth, respectively. Based on the sum of these rewards R = Rfmt +

Rcon + Rsim , the group advantage is calculated to update the policy model. Through this group-relative comparison, model autonomously learns to increase generation probability of high-quality CoTs, thereby thoroughly internalizing spatiotem-poral constraints and self-editing capabilities. 

5 Experiment 

5.1 Experimental Setup Datasets. We conduct experiments using the 2017 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), a nationwide travel survey covering approxi-mately 129,696 households and 264,234 persons (McGuckin and Fucci, 2018). To evaluate geo-graphical generalization, we extract subsets from four states: California, Arizona, Georgia, and Ok-lahoma. Each user persona contains 12 socio-demographic features. All raw travel records are standardized into 10 semantic activity categories. Further details regarding the specific definitions of these metrics are provided in Appendix A.1 

Baselines Setup. We benchmark our approach against three categories of baselines. The first category comprises traditional deep learning mod-els, including DeepMove (Feng et al., 2018) and LSTPM (Sun et al., 2020), which rely heavily on historical sequential modeling mechanisms. The second category includes prompt-based and retrieval-augmented generation frameworks, where we compare with CoPB (Shao et al., 2024) and RAGHome (Liu et al., 2024). These methods lever-age advanced prompt engineering and retrieval-augmented generation to synthesize schedules. The third category evaluates zero-shot large lan-guage models. We assess representative proprietary and open-source models, including ChatGPT-5.2, Qwen3-8b, and LLaMA3.1-8b, under both single-pass generation and dual-agent architectural modes. Further details regarding the specific definitions of these metrics are provided in Appendix A.2. 

Implementation Details. We employ GPT-5.2 as the teacher model to generate Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning data. Based on data, we initialize the editor agent by Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) on Qwen3-8B with LoRA ( r = 32 , α = 64 ) for 3 epochs using a learning rate of 5 × 10 −5. We further optimize the SFT model with Group Rela-tive Policy Optimization (GRPO), while keeping the same LoRA configuration. For GRPO, we train the model for 1000 steps with a learning rate of 

1 × 10 −5, using 8 roll-out samples per prompt and a sampling temperature of 0.7. Further details re-garding the specific definitions of these metrics are provided in Appendix A.4. 

Evaluation Metrics To evaluate generated ac-tivity chains, we use a three-level framework of 12 metrics, summarized in Table 3. Sequence Similarity Metrics (e.g., accuracy, f1_score, and edit_dist) measure structural fidelity and sequen-tial consistency with respect to reference diaries. Temporal Alignment Metrics (e.g., macro_int and micro_hour) assess whether generated schedules match reference timing and duration patterns at a 15-minute resolution. Distributional Consistency Metrics (e.g., data_jsd and act_type) use Jensen-Shannon Divergence to evaluate whether synthe-sized populations recover real-world aggregate reg-ularities and semantic distributions. Detailed met-ric definitions are provided in Appendix A.5. Table 1 presents the comprehensive performance comparison of all models across the four states. Beyond the absolute numerical superiority, the re-sults reveal fundamental differences in how various architectures handle the mobility synthesis task. 

5.2 Main Results 

Traditional deep learning baselines, such as Deep-Move and LSTPM, degrade sharply in the zero-shot setting because they rely heavily on histor-Method California Arizona Georgia Oklahoma 

Acc ↑ Mint ↓ Atype ↓ Acc ↑ Mint ↓ Atype ↓ Acc ↑ Mint ↓ Atype ↓ Acc ↑ Mint ↓ Atype ↓

Traditional Baselines 

⋄ DeepMove 0.554 0.660 0.229 0.521 0.666 0.252 0.448 0.657 0.264 0.472 0.676 0.281 

⋄ LSTPM 0.402 0.705 0.290 0.420 0.691 0.300 0.379 0.693 0.288 0.376 0.697 0.287 General LLM Baselines 

⋄ ChatGPT 0.660 0.425 0.199 0.664 0.399 0.195 0.583 0.403 0.201 0.616 0.404 0.158 

⋄ Qwen 0.553 0.535 0.228 0.551 0.598 0.194 0.511 0.583 0.238 0.542 0.570 0.167 

⋄ LLaMA 0.526 0.576 0.291 0.524 0.643 0.248 0.486 0.624 0.305 0.515 0.611 0.213 Specific LLM 

⋄ CoPB 0.703 0.577 0.141 0.674 0.579 0.157 0.602 0.603 0.152 0.627 0.567 0.140 

⋄ RAGHome 0.679 0.556 0.183 0.658 0.548 0.198 0.593 0.574 0.167 0.614 0.528 0.142 Fine-tuned LLMs 

⋄ GRPO_LLaMA 0.712 0.281 0.141 0.742 0.322 0.169 0.661 0.311 0.165 0.689 0.252 0.132 

⋄ GRPO_Qwen 0.734 0.258 0.118 0.780 0.251 0.089 0.655 0.319 0.171 0.659 0.265 0.099 

Table 1: Performance comparison across four states under different models and settings.                                                                                                        

> Model CA →CA CA →AZ CA →GA CA →OK AZ →CA
> Acc ↑Mint ↓Atype ↓Acc ↑Mint ↓Atype ↓Acc ↑Mint ↓Atype ↓Acc ↑Mint ↓Atype ↓Acc ↑Mint ↓Atype ↓
> SFT_CoPB 0.743 0.289 0.154 0.682 0.420 0.127 0.642 0.303 0.153 0.711 0.325 0.114 0.654 0.371 0.109 SFT_RAGHome 0.691 0.349 0.176 0.671 0.322 0.183 0.643 0.324 0.134 0.672 0.246 0.120 0.636 0.287 0.151 SFT_LLaMA 0.724 0.214 0.110 0.689 0.256 0.158 0.632 0.253 0.195 0.650 0.227 0.165 0.653 0.228 0.141 SFT_Qwen 0.753 0.231 0.104 0.745 0.239 0.113 0.708 0.248 0.130 0.714 0.241 0.127 0.699 0.214 0.097
> GRPO_LLaMA 0.732 0.248 0.122 0.720 0.260 0.131 0.681 0.276 0.147 0.690 0.268 0.142 0.671 0.233 0.118
> GRPO_Qwen 0.761 0.202 0.094 0.768 0.215 0.101 0.736 0.229 0.119 0.743 0.223 0.116 0.721 0.191 0.086

Table 2: Cross-state transfer performance. Models (SFT_LLaMA, SFT_Qwen, GRPO_LLaMA, GRPO_Qwen ) are implemented on the multi-agent architecture. CA, AZ, GA, and OK denote California, Arizona, Georgia, and Oklahoma, respectively.    

> Category Metrics Sequence Similar-ity accuracy ( Acc ), f1_score, edit_dist, bleu_score Temporal Align-ment macro_hour, micro_hour, micro_int, macro_int ( Mint )Distributional Con-sistency data_jsd, act_type ( Atype ), uni_act_type, traj_len

Table 3: Evaluation metrics. 

ical trajectory sequences. Without past mobility records, they struggle to map static demographic attributes to dynamic behaviors. Prompt-based and retrieval-augmented methods, including CoPB and RAGHome, partially alleviate this issue by exploit-ing the language understanding of large language models, but their performance remains limited. Al-though prompts can steer the general structure of daily routines, they lack an explicit mechanism to enforce physical consistency, leading to spatiotem-poral conflicts such as overlapping activities or in-complete 24-hour schedules. Our fine-tuned models overcome these limi-tations by moving from constrained generation to active editing. In Table 1, Grpo_Qwen and Grpo_LLaMA achieve state-of-the-art perfor-mance across all regions. In particular, Grpo_Qwen not only delivers the highest temporal accuracy but also minimizes the Jensen-Shannon Divergence metrics (macro_int and act_type). These results show that our framework goes beyond generating plausible activities, enabling the synthesis of per-sonalized, statistically accurate, and physically con-sistent daily schedules. 

5.3 Zero-shot Transferability Analysis 

Cold-start remains a fundamental challenge in ur-ban mobility modeling, as unseen regions often lack sufficient historical data. To test whether our framework learns transferable mobility patterns rather than state-specific shortcuts, we conduct California Arizona Georgia Oklahoma 0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

> Accuracy
> LLaMA (Single)
> LLaMA (Multi)
> Grpo_Qwen (Ours)
> Qwen (Single)
> Qwen (Multi)
> ChatGPT (Single)
> ChatGPT (Multi) (a) Single vs. Multi performance

California Arizona Georgia Oklahoma 0.4 

0.6 

0.8  

> Accuracy
> Sft_LLaMA
> Grpo_LLaMA
> Sft_Qwen
> Grpo_Qwen (b) SFT vs. GRPO performance

Figure 2: Ablation studies on the proposed ActivityEditor. 

cross-state zero-shot transfer experiments. Models trained on California are directly test on California, Arizona, Georgia, and Oklahoma without domain adaptation, and we consider the reverse setting of Arizona → California. As shown in Table 2, our method outperforms task-specific baselines such as CoPB (Shao et al., 2024) and RAGHome (Liu et al., 2024), while maintaining stable macro-level behavior statistics across target states. These results show that our rule-guided frame-work captures transferable mobility logic in-stead of memorizing localized geographic pat-terns. With California as the source domain, per-formance drops on other states remain limited, and 

Multi_agent_grpo_Qwen delivers the best over-all results in most settings. Arizona → California performs worse than California → Arizona, likely because Arizona offers fewer training samples for learning transferable decision patterns. Even so, the relative ranking of model variants remains largely unchanged, demonstrating the robustness of our framework under data-scarce source domains. 

5.4 Ablation Study on Model Designs 

To disentangle the contributions of our specific ar-chitectural choices and training pipelines, we per-form an in-depth ablation analysis based on the results in Table 2. 

Architecture Ablation on Generation Modes. 

We evaluated general zero-shot large language mod-els under both single-agent and multi-agent con-figurations. Across ChatGPT, Qwen, and LLaMA, the multi-agent mode consistently and noticeably outperforms the single-pass generation in Figure 2a. This consistent performance gap highlights a crucial structural insight: daily mobility scheduling is essentially a constrained optimization problem. A single-pass autoregressive generation accumu-lates logical errors over a long horizon, leading to hallucinations. Introducing a multi-agent auditing mechanism provides the necessary reflection space to iteratively resolve these constraints, validating our core motivation for designing a Generate-then-Edit pipeline. 

Training Strategy Ablation on SFT and GRPO. 

Figure 2b and Table 1 show that SFT and GRPO play complementary roles in capability acquisition. SFT mainly provides statistical alignment, allow-ing the model to learn the mapping between de-mographic attributes and activity distributions and achieve competitive divergence scores. However, imitation alone is insufficient to reliably enforce hard physical constraints, leaving spatiotemporal conflicts unresolved. GRPO addresses this limi-tation by introducing rule-based rewards, which drive the model to internalize physical constraints and improve logical consistency during reasoning. This shift from SFT to GRPO reflects the transition from statistical fitting to constraint-aware reason-ing, yielding the best overall accuracy. For the latter two states, however, the gap between SFT and GRPO becomes much smaller. This is mainly due to the extremely limited training data in these states, which makes GRPO more prone to overfit-ting and reduces its advantage over SFT. This result further validates the necessity and effectiveness of our Zero-shot Transferability Analysis, especially in low-resource settings. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented ActivityEditor, a dual-agent frame-work designed for high-fidelity, zero-shot mobility synthesis in cold-start and cross-state scenarios. By integrating intention-driven generation with rule-constrained refinement, our method captures uni-versal mobility logic rather than merely memoriz-ing localized patterns. Experimental results demon-strate that ActivityEditor consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, achieving superior statis-tical fidelity and physical validity across diverse urban contexts. Future work will focus on develop-ing a unified mobility foundation framework that integrates agentic reasoning with human mobility laws to support trajectory generation, completion, and prediction within a single modeling paradigm. 

Limitations 

Despite its promising performance, several limita-tions of A CTIVITY EDITOR warrant further investi-gation: • Spatial Granularity: Currently, the frame-work focuses on generating zone-level activity chains. It lacks the capability to synthesize precise POI-level coordinates for micro-level urban analysis. Future research will explore the integration of external POI-retrieval tools and urban perception modules to assist the LLM in achieving more fine-grained spatial generation. • Computational Efficiency: The multi-turn iterative refinement between the Intention-driven and Editor agents incurs significant computational overhead, which may limit its scalability for massive population simulations. Knowledge distillation into smaller language models or the optimization of reinforcement learning efficiency represents a viable direc-tion to reduce inference latency. • Robustness and Hallucination: As an LLM-based framework, the output of A CTIVITY ED- 

> ITOR

is not fully controllable. While we uti-lize a structured parser to extract the expected context, it may occasionally fail. Furthermore, due to the inherent potential for hallucination, the agent may generate "phantom" addresses that do not exist in the real world. While verifying this against a valid location list is feasible in controlled experiments, ensuring absolute robustness in open-world urban ap-plications remains a significant challenge. 

Ethical Considerations 

All human mobility data used in the experi-ments come from publicly available open-source datasets(McGuckin and Fucci, 2018). We do not attempt to extract any personal information from these datasets. 

AI Usage 

We state that AI-assisted technologies were used strictly for the purpose of language polishing and grammar correction to enhance the clarity of our writing. The authors take full responsibility for the integrity of the work, including the validity of all experimental results and the accuracy of all references. References 

Sepehr Golrokh Amin, Devin Rhoads, Fatemeh Fakhrmoosavi, Nicholas E Lownes, and John N Ivan. 2025. Generating individual travel diaries using large language models informed by census and land-use data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.09710 .Guanting Dong, Yifei Chen, Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Hongjin Qian, Yutao Zhu, Hangyu Mao, Guorui Zhou, Zhicheng Dou, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. Tool-star: Empowering llm-brained multi-tool rea-soner via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16410 .Yuwei Du, Jie Feng, Jian Yuan, and Yong Li. 2025. Cams: A citygpt-powered agentic framework for urban human mobility simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13599 .Jiazhan Feng, Shijue Huang, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yujia Qin, Baoquan Zhong, Chengquan Jiang, Jinxin Chi, and Wanjun Zhong. 2025a. Retool: Reinforce-ment learning for strategic tool use in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11536 .Jie Feng, Yuwei Du, Jie Zhao, and Yong Li. 2025b. Agentmove: A large language model based agentic framework for zero-shot next location prediction. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1322–1338. Jie Feng, Yong Li, Chao Zhang, Funing Sun, Fanchao Meng, Ang Guo, and Depeng Jin. 2018. Deepmove: Predicting human mobility with attentional recurrent networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 world wide web conference , pages 1459–1468. Jie Feng, Zeyu Yang, Fengli Xu, Haisu Yu, Mudan Wang, and Yong Li. 2020. Learning to simulate human mobility. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge dis-covery & data mining , pages 3426–3433. Shanshan Feng, Haoming Lyu, Fan Li, Zhu Sun, and Caishun Chen. 2024. Where to move next: Zero-shot generalization of llms for next poi recommen-dation. In 2024 ieee conference on artificial intelli-gence (cai) , pages 1530–1535. IEEE. Qiang Gao, Fan Zhou, Goce Trajcevski, Kunpeng Zhang, Ting Zhong, and Fengli Zhang. 2019. Pre-dicting human mobility via variational attention. In 

The world wide web conference , pages 2750–2756. Qiang Gao, Fan Zhou, Kunpeng Zhang, Goce Tra-jcevski, Xucheng Luo, and Fengli Zhang. 2017. Iden-tifying human mobility via trajectory embeddings. In 

IJCAI , volume 17, pages 1689–1695. Letian Gong, Shengnan Guo, Yan Lin, Yichen Liu, Er-wen Zheng, Yiwei Shuang, Youfang Lin, Jilin Hu, and Huaiyu Wan. 2025. Stcdm: Spatio-temporal contrastive diffusion model for check-in sequence generation. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering .Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 .Chonghua Han, Yuan Yuan, Yukun Liu, Jingtao Ding, Jie Feng, and Yong Li. 2025. Unimove: A uni-fied model for multi-city human mobility prediction. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06986 .Tianfu He, Jie Bao, Ruiyuan Li, Sijie Ruan, Yanhua Li, Li Song, Hui He, and Yu Zheng. 2020. What is the human mobility in a new city: Transfer mobility knowledge across cities. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020 , pages 1355–1365. Kunrong Li and Kwan Hui Lim. 2025. Rallm-poi: Retrieval-augmented llm for zero-shot next poi rec-ommendation with geographical reranking. In Pacific Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , pages 210–218. Springer. Peibo Li, Maarten de Rijke, Hao Xue, Shuang Ao, Yang Song, and Flora D Salim. 2024a. Large language models for next point-of-interest recommendation. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SI-GIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 1463–1472. Siyu Li, Toan Tran, Haowen Lin, John Krumm, Cyrus Shahabi, Lingyi Zhao, Khurram Shafique, and Li Xiong. 2024b. Geo-llama: Leveraging llms for human mobility trajectory generation with spatiotem-poral constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.13918 .Qi Liu, Can Li, and Wanjing Ma. 2026. Gatsim: Urban mobility simulation with generative agents. Trans-portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies ,186:105576. Yifan Liu, Xishun Liao, Haoxuan Ma, Brian Yueshuai He, Chris Stanford, and Jiaqi Ma. 2024. Hu-man mobility modeling with household coordina-tion activities under limited information via retrieval-augmented llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.17495 .Qingyue Long, Huandong Wang, Tong Li, Lisi Huang, Kun Wang, Qiong Wu, Guangyu Li, Yanping Liang, Li Yu, and Yong Li. 2023. Practical synthetic human trajectories generation based on variational point pro-cesses. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining ,pages 4561–4571. Nancy McGuckin and Anthony Fucci. 2018. Summary of travel trends: 2017 national household travel sur-vey. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, and 1 others. 2022. Training language models to follow in-structions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:27730–27744. Zehan Qi, Xiao Liu, Iat Long Iong, Hanyu Lai, Xue-qiao Sun, Wenyi Zhao, Yu Yang, Xinyue Yang, Ji-adai Sun, Shuntian Yao, and 1 others. 2024. We-brl: Training llm web agents via self-evolving online curriculum reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02337 .Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:53728–53741. Chenyang Shao, Fengli Xu, Bingbing Fan, Jingtao Ding, Yuan Yuan, Meng Wang, and Yong Li. 2024. Chain-of-planned-behaviour workflow elicits few-shot mobility generation in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09836 .Xuan Song, Hiroshi Kanasugi, and Ryosuke Shibasaki. 2016. Deeptransport: Prediction and simulation of human mobility and transportation mode at a city-wide level. In Proceedings of the twenty-fifth inter-national joint conference on artificial intelligence ,pages 2618–2624. Ke Sun, Tieyun Qian, Tong Chen, Yile Liang, Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen, and Hongzhi Yin. 2020. Where to go next: Modeling long-and short-term user pref-erences for point-of-interest recommendation. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial in-telligence , volume 34, pages 214–221. Dongsheng Wang, Shen Gao, Chengrui Huang, Yuxi Huang, Ruixiang Feng, and Shuo Shang. 2025. Tool4poi: A tool-augmented llm frame-work for next poi recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.06405 .Huandong Wang, Qizhong Zhang, Yuchen Wu, Depeng Jin, Xing Wang, Lin Zhu, and Li Yu. 2023a. Synthe-sizing human trajectories based on variational point processes. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 36(4):1785–1799. Jiawei Wang, Renhe Jiang, Chuang Yang, Zengqing Wu, Makoto Onizuka, Ryosuke Shibasaki, Noboru Koshizuka, and Chuan Xiao. 2024a. Large language models as urban residents: An llm agent framework for personal mobility generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:124547–124574. Xinglei Wang, Meng Fang, Zichao Zeng, and Tao Cheng. 2023b. Where would i go next? large lan-guage models as human mobility predictors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15197 .Yu Wang, Tongya Zheng, Yuxuan Liang, Shunyu Liu, and Mingli Song. 2024b. Cola: Cross-city mobility transformer for human trajectory simulation. In Pro-ceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , pages 3509–3520. Quan Wei, Siliang Zeng, Chenliang Li, William Brown, Oana Frunza, Wei Deng, Anderson Schneider, Yuriy Nevmyvaka, Yang Katie Zhao, Alfredo Garcia, and 1 others. 2025. Reinforcing multi-turn reasoning in llm agents via turn-level reward design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11821 .Haomin Wen, Youfang Lin, Lixia Wu, Xiaowei Mao, Tianyue Cai, Yunfeng Hou, Shengnan Guo, Yuxuan Liang, Guangyin Jin, Yiji Zhao, and 1 others. 2024. A survey on service route and time prediction in in-stant delivery: Taxonomy, progress, and prospects. 

IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-neering .Ziqing Wu, Zhu Sun, Dongxia Wang, Lu Zhang, Jie Zhang, and Yew Soon Ong. 2024. Mrp-llm: Mul-titask reflective large language models for privacy-preserving next poi recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07796 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations .Mao Ye, Peifeng Yin, Wang-Chien Lee, and Dik-Lun Lee. 2011. Exploiting geographical influence for collaborative point-of-interest recommendation. In 

Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in Informa-tion Retrieval , pages 325–334. Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, and 1 others. 2025. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476 .Yuan Yuan, Jingtao Ding, Huandong Wang, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li. 2022. Activity trajectory generation via modeling spatiotemporal dynamics. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 4752–4762. Siliang Zeng, Quan Wei, William Brown, Oana Frunza, Yuriy Nevmyvaka, Yang Katie Zhao, and Mingyi Hong. 2025. Reinforcing multi-turn reasoning in llm agents via turn-level credit assignment. In ICML 2025 Workshop on Computer Use Agents .Guibin Zhang, Hejia Geng, Xiaohang Yu, Zhenfei Yin, Zaibin Zhang, Zelin Tan, Heng Zhou, Zhongzhi Li, Xiangyuan Xue, Yijiang Li, and 1 others. 2025. The landscape of agentic reinforcement learning for llms: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02547 .Yu Zheng, Yuming Lin, Liang Zhao, Tinghai Wu, De-peng Jin, and Yong Li. 2023. Spatial planning of urban communities via deep reinforcement learning. 

Nature Computational Science , 3(9):748–762. Lin Zhong, Lingzhi Wang, Xu Yang, and Qing Liao. 2025. Comapoi: A collaborative multi-agent frame-work for next poi prediction bridging the gap between trajectory and language. In Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 1768–1778. Yifei Zhou, Song Jiang, Yuandong Tian, Jason We-ston, Sergey Levine, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, and Xian Li. 2025. Sweet-rl: Training multi-turn llm agents on collaborative reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15478 .

A Appendix 

A.1 Dataset Description and Analysis 

To comprehensively evaluate our proposed frame-work, we utilize the 2017 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) dataset. This dataset pro-vides rich socio-demographic profile information paired with highly detailed 24-hour activity and travel diaries for residents across the United States. We specifically extract subsets from four represen-tative states: California, Arizona, Georgia, and Oklahoma. These states encompass high diversity in urban structures, economic development levels, and population densities. As illustrated in Figure 3, the volume of available trajectory data varies significantly across different regions. California possesses over 56,000 home activity records, fol-lowed by Georgia with over 25,000, Arizona with approximately 6,900, and Oklahoma with roughly 3,100. This severe data imbalance highlights a crit-ical real-world challenge: many newly planned or smaller regions lack sufficient historical data to sup-port the training of reliable predictive models. This discrepancy directly motivates our zero-shot cross-regional generation task, which aims to transfer mobility knowledge from data-rich source domains to data-scarce target domains. Despite the vast differences in data scale and geospatial layouts, the macroscopic statistical fea-tures of the dataset reveal that fundamental human mobility patterns remain highly consistent, which strongly validates the theoretical feasibility of our transfer learning approach. Figure 4 presents the stacked percentage distribution of activity types across the four states. The proportion of human ac-tivities remains universally stable across different regions, with home, work, and shopping consis-tently dominating daily routines. Similarly, Fig-ure 6 demonstrates that the distribution of daily activity chain lengths follows a nearly identical right-skewed pattern across all states, typically peaking between three to five activities per person. This cross-regional consistency provides empirical support for our core assumption: human mobil-ity intentions are fundamentally driven by socio-demographic attributes rather than determined by local spatial geometric features. It is exactly this ubiquitous similarity that enables our intention-driven agent to successfully generalize to unseen cities in a zero-shot manner. Furthermore, the dataset clearly reflects the strict physical boundaries and physiological constraints governing human behavior. Figure 5 visualizes the average duration of various activities across differ-ent states. The temporal patterns strictly adhere to human commonsense: rigid activities such as sleep-ing at home or working typically span hundreds of minutes, whereas transitional or service activities, such as dropping off children, generally remain sta-ble under forty minutes. These universal temporal regularities do not fluctuate across state borders. This observation fundamentally underpins our de-sign of the rule-based reward model in the Group Relative Policy Optimization phase. By transform-ing these ubiquitous physiological and temporal constraints into programmatic reward signals, the editor agent is able to autonomously internalize the authentic logic of mobility behavior, thereby elimi-nating logical hallucinations without requiring any target-domain training data. 

A.2 Detailed Description of Baselines 

To comprehensively evaluate the performance of the proposed framework, four representative base-line methods are selected for comparison. These methods are divided into two categories: traditional deep learning baselines and large language model baselines. 

DeepMove (Feng et al., 2018): DeepMove is a classic human mobility prediction model. It em-ploys an attentional recurrent neural network to model sequential transition patterns and multi-level periodic behaviors in users’ historical trajectories, thereby enabling the prediction of future mobility behavior. 

LSTPM (Sun et al., 2020): LSTPM is designed to capture both long-term and short-term user mo-bility preferences. By combining a context-aware non-local network with a geo-dilated recurrent neu-ral network, it effectively models users’ long-term preferences and short-term dynamic changes in point-of-interest visits. 

CoPB (Shao et al., 2024): CoPB is grounded in the psychological Theory of Planned Behavior and uses a structured prompt engineering workflow to guide large language models to first reason about users’ subjective beliefs and behavioral intentions, and then generate daily activity sequences, thereby improving the logical consistency and plausibility of mobility generation. 

RAGHome (Liu et al., 2024): RAGHome intro-duces a retrieval-augmented generation mechanism that retrieves historical mobility records of individ-uals with characteristics similar to the target user and incorporates them as contextual examples into the large language model, thereby enhancing gen-eration quality and realism in complex spatiotem-poral tasks. 

A.3 Prompt Examples 

For completeness, this subsection summarizes the core prompts used throughout our trajectory gener-ation framework. 

A.3.1 Prompt of Intention-driven Agent 

> You are a daily schedule planner. Given a person’s profile, generate a complete and realistic 24-hour schedule with exact start/end times. RULES: - Use ONLY these activity types: home, work, education, shopping, service, medical, dine_out, socialize, exercise, dropoff_pickup - Schedule MUST cover full 24 hours: start at 00:00, end at 24:00, NO gaps or overlaps - Must start and end with "home" - Consecutive activities must connect ( end_time of one = start_time of the next )- Durations must be realistic based on the person’s profile OUTPUT FORMAT: {"reasoning": "Brief explanation of the schedule choices", "schedule": [ {"activity": "home", "start_time": "00:00", "end_time": "07:30"}, {"activity": "work", "start_time": "07:30", "end_time": "17:00"}, {"activity": "home", "start_time": "17:00", "end_time": "24:00"} ]}USER MESSAGE FORMAT: Generate a complete 24-hour schedule for this person: - Age range: {age_range} - Gender: {gender} - Race: {race} - Education: {education} - Employment status: {employment_status} - Work schedule: {work_schedule} - Occupation: {occupation} - Primary activity: {primary_activity} - Work from home: {work_from_home} - Driver on travel day: { driver_on_travel_day} - Distance to work (miles): { distance_to_work_miles} - Work state: {work_state}

A.3.2 Prompt of Editor Agent Figure 3: Activity number distribution by state. 

You are an Editor Agent for daily schedule refinement. Your task: 1. Check the INITIAL SCHEDULE against 5 constraint types: Physical, Logical, Common Sense, Temporal, and Coherence 2. Identify any violations in the draft 3. Apply edit operations from the action space: ADD / DELETE / SHIFT / REPLACE / SPLIT 4. Output the final constraint-satisfying schedule OUTPUT FORMAT: [THOUGHT] Constraint Checking: 1. Physical Constraints (Hard): overlaps, 24 h coverage, ends at 24:00 2. Logical Constraints (Hard): starts/ends at home, starts at 00:00, consecutive identical activities must be merged 3. Common Sense Constraints (Soft): activities match socio-demographic profile 4. Temporal Constraints (Soft): realistic durations for each activity type 5. Coherence Constraints (Soft): logical transitions, not over-fragmented Edit Operations Applied: - ADD: activity ’Y’ at time HH:MM (reason) - DELETE: activity ’X’ at index N (reason) - SHIFT: activity ’Z’ start/end time adjustment (reason) - REPLACE: activity ’A’ -> ’B’ (reason) - SPLIT: activity ’X’ divided into two segments (reason) Final Result: All constraints satisfied / Violations remain [/THOUGHT] [JSON] [final schedule as JSON array] [/JSON] USER MESSAGE FORMAT: PERSON PROFILE: {user_profile as JSON} INITIAL SCHEDULE: {initial_schedule as JSON} 

A.3.3 Prompt of Data Generation Teacher Model 

SYSTEM PROMPT: You are a schedule planning expert. You understand human behavior patterns and generate realistic daily schedules. USER MESSAGE FORMAT: You are a Critic and Editor Agent. Your job is to validate and refine a daily Figure 4: Activity type distribution by state. 

schedule. PERSON PROFILE: {user_profile as JSON} INITIAL SCHEDULE (from unified 2-stage generator): {initial_schedule as JSON} GROUND TRUTH REFERENCE (for comparison): {ground_truth_schedule as JSON} YOUR TASK: Act as the Editor. Check constraints on the INITIAL SCHEDULE, identify violations, and apply edits to match the GROUND TRUTH. OUTPUT FORMAT: [THOUGHT] Constraint Checking: 1. Physical (Hard): overlaps? 24h coverage? ends at 24:00? -> Yes / No 2. Logical (Hard): starts/ends home? starts at 00:00? -> Yes / No 3. Common Sense (Soft): activities match profile? -> Yes / No 4. Temporal (Soft): realistic durations? -> Yes / No 5. Coherence (Soft): logical flow? not fragmented? -> Yes / No Edits to Match Ground Truth: If already matches: No edits needed Otherwise list each operation: - DELETE: ’X’ at idx N (reason) - ADD: ’Y’ at time HH:MM (reason) - SHIFT: ’Z’ time adjustment (reason) - REPLACE: ’A’ -> ’B’ (reason) Final Result: All constraints satisfied after edits? Yes / No [/THOUGHT] [JSON] [final schedule - must match the GROUND TRUTH] [/JSON] Be thorough in checking each constraint on the INITIAL SCHEDULE. Show edit operations explicitly if violations are found. 

A.3.4 Prompt of SFT Student Model 

You are a Critic and Editor Agent for daily schedule refinement. Your task: 1. Check the INITIAL SCHEDULE against 5 constraint types: Physical, Logical, Common Sense, Temporal, and Coherence 2. Identify any violations 3. Apply edit operations: ADD / DELETE / SHIFT / REPLACE 4. Output the refined schedule OUTPUT FORMAT: [THOUGHT] Constraint Checking: 1. Physical Constraints (Hard): overlaps, 24 h coverage, ends at 24:00 2. Logical Constraints (Hard): starts/ends at home, starts at 00:00 3. Common Sense Constraints (Soft): age/ employment appropriate activities Figure 5: Activity duration by state. 

4. Temporal Constraints (Soft): realistic durations 5. Coherence Constraints (Soft): logical transitions, not over-fragmented Applying Edit Operations: - DELETE: activity ’X’ at index N (reason) - ADD: activity ’Y’ at time HH:MM (reason) - SHIFT: activity time adjustment (reason) - REPLACE: activity type change (reason) Final Result: Yes / No [/THOUGHT] [JSON] [refined schedule as JSON array] [/JSON] USER MESSAGE FORMAT: PERSON PROFILE: {user_profile as JSON} INITIAL SCHEDULE: {initial_schedule as JSON} TRAINING TARGET: [THOUGHT] {teacher-generated constraint-checking trace and edit operations} [/THOUGHT] [JSON] {final refined schedule matching ground truth} [/JSON] 

A.3.5 Prompt of GRPO Training 

You are a daily activity schedule generator. Your task is to generate a realistic daily schedule for a person based on their profile. OUTPUT FORMAT: [THOUGHT] Brief reasoning about the person’s schedule patterns. [/THOUGHT] [JSON] [{"activity": "home", "start_time": "00:00", "end_time": "07:00"} ][/JSON] The schedule must start at 00:00 and end at 24:00, covering the full day without gaps or overlaps. USER MESSAGE FORMAT: Generate a daily schedule for this person: {user_profile as JSON} Figure 6: Chain length distribution by state. 

A.4 Detailed Parameter Settings 

To ensure the reproducibility of our experiments, we provide the complete hyperparameter configu-rations for both the Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) stages in Table 4.             

> Hyperparameter SFT Stage Base Model Qwen3-8B LoRA Rank (r) 32 LoRA Alpha 64 LoRA Dropout 0.05 Training Epochs 3 epochs Peak Learning Rate 5e-5 Learning Rate Scheduler Cosine Warmup 50 steps Per-device Batch Size 2Gradient Accumulation Steps 8Max Sequence Length 4096

Table 4: Hyperparameter settings for the SFT stage. 

All models were trained using the bfloat16 preci-sion format to optimize memory usage while main-taining numerical stability. The AdamW optimizer was utilized across all training phases, with the beta1 and beta2 parameters set to 0.9 and 0.99, re-spectively, alongside a weight decay coefficient of 0.1. To prevent gradient explosion, a gradi-ent clipping threshold of 1.0 was universally ap-plied across all parameter updates. As stated in the main text, both stages utilized the exact same Low-Rank Adaptation configuration to efficiently update               

> Hyperparameter GRPO Stage Base Model Qwen3-8B LoRA Rank (r) 32 LoRA Alpha 64 LoRA Dropout 0.05 Training Steps 1000 steps Peak Learning Rate 1e-5 Learning Rate Scheduler Cosine Warmup 0.1 ratio Gradient Accumulation Steps 4Max Sequence Length 4096 Roll-out Samples per Prompt 8Sampling Temperature 0.7 Min_p 0.1

Table 5: Hyperparameter settings for the GRPO stage. 

the attention and feed-forward modules. The spe-cific trainable adapters were applied to the q_proj, k_proj, v_proj, o_proj, gate_proj, up_proj, and down_proj layers. The dataset was split into train-ing, validation, and testing sets with a ratio of 8:1:1, and all reported results were averaged over three independent runs. 

A.5 Evaluation Metrics Formulation 

Before computing the metrics, each continuous daily schedule is discretized into a fixed-length sequence of 96 time slots, representing 15-minute intervals. The assigned activity for each slot is the one with the longest temporal overlap. Let G ∈

ZN ×96 and T ∈ ZN ×96 denote the generated and ground truth slot matrices for N users, respectively. We group the 12 metrics into three mathematical categories. 

Sequence Similarity Metrics. These metrics evaluate how closely the generated activity se-quence matches the ground-truth sequence at the token and structural levels. Accuracy (Acc) calculates the slot-level exact match rate between the generated and ground truth sequences: Acc = 1

N × 96 

> N

X

> i=1 96

X

> t=1

1[Gi,t = Ti,t ] (4) Macro F1-Score computes the balanced accuracy over C = 11 activity classes: F1 macro = 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

2 · Prec k · Recall k

Prec k + Recall k

(5) Edit Distance (edit_dist) calculates the minimum edit cost, normalized by the sequence length: edit_dist = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

Levenshtein (Gi, T i)96 (6) BLEU Score applies n-gram sequence overlap precision up to 4-gram: BLEU = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

sentence_BLEU (Ti, G i) (7) 

Temporal Alignment Metrics. These metrics measure whether the generated schedules preserve realistic temporal patterns, including activity dura-tions and starting times. These metrics utilize the Jensen-Shannon Diver-gence (JSD) to evaluate duration and start-time distributions. Macro_int evaluates the marginal distribution of continuous activity durations (run lengths), denoted as frequency vector m:macro_int = JSD 

 mgt 

∥mgt ∥1

mgen 

∥mgen ∥1



(8) Micro_int computes the divergence on the flat-tened joint distribution matrix M of activity types and durations: micro_int = JSD M gt flat 

∥M gt ∥1

M gen flat 

∥M gen ∥1

!

(9) Macro_hour measures the divergence of the marginal distribution of activity onset times (start slots), denoted as vector h:macro_hour = JSD 

 hgt 

∥hgt ∥1

hgen 

∥hgen ∥1



(10) Micro_hour calculates the divergence on the joint distribution matrix H of activity types and their onset times: micro_hour = JSD Hgt flat 

∥Hgt ∥1

Hgen flat 

∥Hgen ∥1

!

(11) 

Distributional Consistency Metrics. These met-rics assess whether the generated population repro-duces the global statistical properties and behav-ioral diversity of the real-world data. Data_jsd evaluates population-level trajectory diversity by treating each full 96-slot sequence as a single token with probability p:data_jsd = JSD (pgt ∥pgen ) (12) Act_type calculates the divergence of the total time budget allocated to each activity category pk:act_type = JSD (pgt  

> k

∥pgen  

> k

) (13) Uni_act_type computes the divergence based on the frequency of distinct activity episodes per cate-gory qk:uni_act_type = JSD (qgt  

> k

∥qgen  

> k

) (14) Traj_len measures the divergence in the distribu-tion of the total number of distinct activity episodes per user, denoted as count vector r:traj_len = JSD 

 rgt 

∥rgt ∥1

rgen 

∥rgen ∥1



(15) 

A.6 Case Study: Profile-Grounded Trajectory Editing 

We present a case study based on a real user from the NHTS California subset. The profile indicates that the user isrelationship a female, a mother, em-ployed full-time in a professional, managerial, or technical occupation, does not work from home, drives on the travel day, and has a short commute distance of 4.15 miles. Her primary activity is working. Initial Draft Reasoning Cues Edited Output Ground Truth                              

> [00:00–07:45] Home [00:00–07:45] Home [00:00–07:45] Home [07:45–16:45] Work occupation →Evening Work [07:45–16:30] Work [07:45–16:30] Work [16:45–18:00] Home relationship →Shopping [16:30–17:20] Shop-ping [16:30–17:30] Shop-ping [17:45–19:00] Work constraint →Fix overlap [17:20–19:50] Work [17:30–17:45] Service [19:00–19:35] Shop-ping short commute →no extra Home stay [19:50–24:00] Home [17:45–20:30] Work [19:35–24:00] Home [20:30–24:00] Home
> Status: invalid Signals: profile + constraint check
> Status: valid Status: observed

Table 6: Case study of profile-grounded trajectory editing. 

Reasoning trace. Reasoning process is as fol-lows: 

[THOUGHT] 

Constraint Checking (5 types): 

1. Physical Constraints (Hard): - De-tected overlap: Home 16:45–18:00 and Work 17:45–19:00 

Result: FAIL 

2. Logical Constraints (Hard): - Starts at Home? Yes - Ends at Home? Yes -Full-day coverage? Yes 

Result: PASS 

3. Common Sense Constraints (Soft): 

- relationship → Shopping - occupation 

→ Evening Work 

Result: informative cues 

4. Temporal Constraints (Soft): - Shop-ping is more plausible after daytime Work than after evening Work 

Result: needs adjustment 

5. Coherence Constraints (Soft): -short commute → avoid extra Home stay before returning to Work 

Result: needs adjustment Editing decision: - shift the first Work block earlier, - move Shopping to the in-terval after daytime Work, - delay the second Work block until after Shopping, - remove the redundant late Shopping seg-ment. 

Output: - Home 00:00–07:45 - Work 07:45–16:30 - Shopping 16:30–17:20 -Work 17:20–19:50 - Home 19:50–24:00 

Result: valid schedule with improved profile consistency and closer structural alignment to the observed trajectory. 

[/THOUGHT] 

This case study shows the role of the Editor Agent: improving a profile-informed draft by fixing hard errors and refining activity order with profile-conditioned commonsense. The result is not an exact match to the observed day, but a more realis-tic and coherent mobility trajectory.