Title: ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03117v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 00:10:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 

SHAHD SEDDIK, University of British Columbia, Canada 

FATEMEH FARD, University of British Columbia, Canada Repository-level fault localization and automated program repair require an agent to identify the relevant code units across files, follow call and data dependencies, and generate a valid patch. Existing graph-based systems provide structural representations of repositories (files, classes, functions and their relationships) but do not model how variable values flow within procedures, leaving agents without the semantic precision needed for function- and line-level localization. We present ARISE ( Agentic Repository-level Issue Solving Engine), which augments an LLM-based agent with a multi-granularity program graph that extends structural relationships down to statement-level nodes connected by intra-procedural definition-use edges. ARISE exposes this graph through a three-tier tool API, which brings data-flow slicing as a first-class, queryable agent primitive that allows the model to trace, in a single call, which statements define or consume a variable of interest. We evaluate on SWE-bench Lite (300 real GitHub issues, 11 Python repositories) using Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct as the backbone. Compared to the unmodified SWE-agent baseline, ARISE improves Function Recall@1 by 17.0 points and Line Recall@1 by 15.0 points. These localization gains translate directly into repair success, with ARISE achieving 22.0% Pass@1 (66/300), a 4.7 percentage-point improvement over SWE-agent. Controlled ablations confirm that the improvement is driven by the data-flow graph rather than the tool schema, and that large code models consume structured slice output directly without requiring a natural-language summarization layer. The graph builder and slicing API are designed as a framework-agnostic, drop-in toolset for future APR research. Additional Key Words and Phrases: Artificial intelligence for software engineering, Repository-level code reasoning, Fault localization, Automatic Program Repair, Graph-based code representation, Code understanding and analysis, Interactive program reasoning, Software maintenance 

1 Introduction 

Modern software development occurs in large repositories where code spans many files, modules, and packages with rich build and dependency relationships [ 27 ]. Automated systems for code now operate across entire repositories; agentic tools can open, edit, and test inside full projects, and planning-based methods coordinate multi-file workflows [ 4 , 40 ]. Evaluation has shifted accordingly to repository-level retrieval, completion, and long-context understanding [16, 18, 19, 29]. Operating at repository scale requires an automated system to (i) identify relevant code units across files and packages, (ii) follow call and data dependencies through the codebase, and (iii) main-tain and use architectural context such as module boundaries and build relationships. We use the term repository-level code reasoning to denote the ability of a system to read, interpret, and act over an entire codebase rather than a single file or snippet. This capability matters because core maintenance and evolution tasks, including fault localization, vulnerability triage, and multi-file feature changes, are bottlenecked by navigation in large codebases [ 41 ]. Empirical studies show that locating the faulty region dominates debugging effort and has motivated extensive information-retrieval-based approaches [ 31 , 41 ]. In parallel, agentic systems interleave reasoning with actions over tools to navigate and edit repositories [ 40 ], while planning frameworks formulate repository-level coding as structured sequences of steps over module dependencies [ 4 ]. Repository-level benchmarks consistently document the difficulty of long-context code understanding and inter-file reasoning [16, 18, 19, 29].  

> Authors’ Contact Information: Shahd Seddik, shahd.seddik@ubc.ca, University of British Columbia, Kelowna, BC, Canada; Fatemeh Fard, fatemeh.fard@ubc.ca, University of British Columbia, Kelowna, BC, Canada.
> arXiv:2605.03117v1 [cs.SE] 4 May 2026 2Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard

Despite this progress, substantial gaps remain. First, many systems still operate at function or file granularity and struggle to capture cross-file and cross-module dependencies; long-context evaluations report sharp performance drops as inputs extend to repository scale, particularly for inter-code-unit relations [ 16 , 29 ]. Second, common retrieval pipelines treat the repository as a flat bag of files or snippets and rely on embeddings or full-file indexing, with limited mechanisms for dynamic exploration or adaptive granularity during reasoning [ 9]. Third, although longer context windows help, scaling them to large repositories remains expensive and brittle for inter-file relations [ 16 , 29 ]. These observations indicate that the bottleneck is not only the internal reasoning capacity of Large Language Models (LLMs) but also how relevant context is located, structured, and presented to the model [18, 19]. Graph-based representations provide a principled substrate to address this bottleneck. Programs can be modeled as graphs with nodes for syntactic or semantic entities and edges for control flow, data flow, and dependencies. Classic formalisms such as Program Dependence Graphs and Code Property Graphs show that fusing control, data, and syntax supports scalable analysis and vulnerability discovery [ 8, 37 ]. Neural methods leverage structure to improve downstream tasks, including gated graph neural networks for program graphs [ 1], path-based code2vec for method naming [ 2 ], and GraphCodeBERT which injects data-flow edges during pretraining [ 9]. At repository scale, explicit structure improves navigation and downstream reasoning [ 24 ], and graph-aware retrieval yields better repository-level completion than flat retrieval [ 20 ]. These findings motivate using graphs as the representational backbone for repository-level systems. However, most graph use in this setting is static. Graphs are commonly precomputed and consumed as fixed features, with limited support for on-demand traversal or selective expansion during reasoning. Many methods capture intra-file relations but under-serve cross-module and multi-package dependencies at realistic scales [ 16 , 29 ]. Training end-to-end full-graph encoders for large repositories is costly and often incompatible with interactive or online usage [ 44 ]. When retrieval is present, the graph frequently serves as a feature source rather than a reasoning substrate that an agent can query directly [ 20 , 24 ]. These limitations suggest the need for an interactive formulation that treats the repository graph as an actionable interface. Studies of developer practice show that engineers approach large systems through iterative, multi-granular exploration. Developers alternate between architectural overviews and detailed inspections, follow call chains using runtime or semantic cues, and trace variables across modules before editing [ 5 , 6 ]. Eye-tracking and IDE telemetry show substantial effort in navigation and comprehension before edits, including with AI assistance [ 32 ]. Work on large multi-file projects requires strategies that differ from small-program contexts [ 26 ]. These observations motivate aligning automated systems with human practice by enabling an agent to explore code structure iteratively, to trace data flow, and to adjust granularity during reasoning. In light of these observations, we present ARISE ( Agentic Repository-level Issue Solving Engine), a system that addresses both localization and patch synthesis by augmenting the SWE-agent framework [ 40 ] with a structured, queryable program graph and a three-tier tool API. SWE-agent provides the agentic scaffold, including its Agent-Computer Interface (ACI), multi-turn protocol, and system prompt conventions. ARISE supplements this scaffold with program-graph tools that give the backbone model precise, queryable evidence about the repository’s code structure and data flow. The central design question driving this work is what graph representation gives an agent the most precise evidence for localizing a bug, under a fixed token budget? Our answer is to augment a structural repository graph with statement-level nodes and intra-procedural def-use edges, and to expose the resulting data-flow slices as a first-class tool primitive. We make three contributions: ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 3

(1) Multi-granularity program graph. We present a repository graph that unifies structural and data-flow information at statement granularity, enabling agents to query not only how code is organised (files, classes, functions) but also how values are defined and propagated within a procedure. This evidence is unavailable in structure-only graphs (Section 3.2). (2) Data-flow slicing as an agent primitive. We introduce data-flow slicing as a first-class, queryable tool in the agent’s API, allowing agents to retrieve the precise set of statements that affect (or are affected by) a variable of interest. The tool supports backward, forward, and bidirectional queries, and returns structured output that models can reason over directly (Tier 2, Section 3). (3) ARISE as a framework-agnostic plug-in toolset. We design ARISE’s graph builder and slicing API as a self-contained, decoupled component, independent of any specific agentic scaffold. Any tool-use-capable agent framework can adopt the toolset as a drop-in plugin, making structured program analysis accessible to future APR research without re-implementing the underlying graph or slicing logic. The experiments are organized around three research questions. 

RQ1 (Localization). Does ARISE improve fault localization accuracy compared to text-only and structural-graph baselines? Fault localization is the prerequisite for any downstream repair attempt. Prior work has shown that file-level localization is relatively well-served by lexical signals, but function- and line-level localization remains the primary bottleneck [ 11 ]. Answering this question reveals whether the combination of a multi-granularity program graph and data-flow slicing tools provides localization gains at finer granularities, and whether those gains are attributable to the graph data itself rather than to the mere presence of additional tools in the agent schema. 

RQ2 (Repair). Does ARISE improve end-to-end bug repair success, and is the improvement explained by localization quality? A localization improvement is only practically valuable if it translates into more bugs being fixed. By measuring the correlation between localization recall and repair success, this question tests whether the two stages are mechanistically linked and whether localization precision is the binding constraint on repair in the ARISE setting. 

RQ3 (Ablation). Which components of ARISE contribute to the observed gains, and how? ARISE in-troduces several interacting components, including structural graph tools, data-flow slicing, context bundling, and an optional natural-language explanation layer. Isolating the contribution of each component is necessary to determine which design decisions are responsible for the improvements observed in RQ1 and RQ2, and to guide future system design. This question is addressed through a series of controlled ablation conditions that add or remove individual components while holding all other variables constant. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 describes the ARISE graph, tool API, and agent loop. Sections 4 and 5 report and interpret results for each RQ. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper with key learnings and suggestions for future work. 

2 Related Work 

This section reviews four areas of prior work that inform ARISE. We first survey LLM-based automated program repair systems (Section 2.1), then discuss fault localization techniques (Sec-tion 2.2), followed by graph-based retrieval methods for code agents (Section 2.3), and finally classical program slicing and its connection to our data-flow tool API (Section 2.4). 

2.1 LLM-based Automated Program Repair 

LLM-based automated program repair (APR) has progressed along two distinct design philosophies. 

Agentic systems equip LLMs with tool-use capabilities and multi-turn reasoning loops, allowing 4 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard 

the model to iteratively explore, localize, and patch code. SWE-agent [ 40 ] introduced the Agent-Computer Interface, enabling LLMs to navigate repositories, edit files, and run tests through a structured command protocol. AutoCodeRover [ 43 ] follows a two-stage pipeline in which the LLM navigates the repository through program-structure-aware search APIs before generating candidate patches iteratively. OrcaLoca [ 42 ] extends the agentic paradigm with priority-based action scheduling, action decomposition with relevance scoring, and distance-aware context pruning, achieving a 65.33% function match rate on SWE-bench Lite [13]. Agentless approaches, by contrast, structure the repair process as a fixed multi-phase pipeline rather than an open-ended agent loop. Agentless [ 36 ] employs a three-phase workflow of hierar-chical localization, patch generation, and patch validation, demonstrating that a carefully designed pipeline can match or outperform tool-driven agents at substantially lower cost. These two lines of work share a common observation that accurate fault localization is the binding constraint on repair success [ 11 ]. ARISE builds on the agentic paradigm (specifically SWE-agent) and targets the localization bottleneck by providing the agent with structured graph-based tools rather than relying on lexical retrieval or free-form code navigation. 

2.2 Fault Localization 

Fault localization (FL) seeks to identify the program elements responsible for a failure. Traditional FL methods operate on program spectra and statistical associations between statement execution and test outcomes [ 41 ]. Spectrum-based fault localization (SBFL) techniques such as Tarantula compute suspiciousness scores from passing and failing test coverage, and remain widely used baselines [ 14 ]. Mutation-based FL refines these scores by observing how small code mutations affect test outcomes, trading higher precision for increased computational cost [25]. With the advent of LLMs, a new family of FL methods has emerged that leverages the model’s ability to reason about natural-language issue descriptions and code semantics jointly [ 17 , 35 ]. AgentFL [ 28 ] scales this idea to project-level contexts by combining multiple agents with static analysis tools. More recently, reasoning-guided approaches generate structured, bug-specific expla-nations before ranking candidate locations [ 30 ], demonstrating that prompting the model to reason about why a location is relevant improves accuracy over purely similarity-based retrieval. Across these methods, a consistent finding is that file-level localization is relatively well-served by lexical signals, whereas function- and line-level localization remains the primary bottleneck [11]. ARISE addresses this bottleneck by providing data-flow slicing as a queryable tool, enabling the agent to trace variable definitions and uses within a function rather than relying on structural proximity alone. 

2.3 Graph-based Retrieval for Code Agents 

Several recent systems construct graphs from code repositories and expose them as retrieval interfaces to LLM agents. RepoGraph [ 24 ] builds a line-level code graph from Python repositories and provides it as a plugin to SWE-agent, capturing reference edges between code entities. On SWE-bench Lite with GPT-4o, it improves the resolve rate by approximately 2 percentage points over the SWE-agent baseline, demonstrating the value of structural context. However, RepoGraph does not construct data-flow edges, and its retrieval is limited to reference-based navigation rather than semantic tracing of variable propagation. LocAgent [ 7] parses codebases into directed heterogeneous graphs with node types for files, classes, and functions, and edge types for imports, invocations, and inheritance. It equips LLM agents with tools for searching entities, traversing the graph, and retrieving code context, achieving 92.7% file-level accuracy on SWE-bench Lite with a fine-tuned Qwen2.5-32B model. LocAgent ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 5                          

> Table 1. Comparison of graph-based APR and localization systems. “Slice API” denotes whether a data-flow slice can be queried as a structured agent tool.
> System Graph granularity Data-flow edges Agent tool API Slice API
> KGCompass [39] File / function None (issue/PR metadata) Yes (GPT-4) No RepoGraph [24] Line-level Reference edges only Plugin No LocAgent [7] File / class / fn None Yes No CodexGraph [21] Module / class / fn None LLM queries No ARISE (ours) Package →statement AST def-use (intra-proc.) Yes ✓

demonstrates the effectiveness of graph-guided multi-hop reasoning for localization, but its graph granularity stops at the function level and it does not model data-flow relationships. CodexGraph [ 21 ] takes a different approach by integrating LLM agents with Neo4j graph databases, enabling the agent to construct and execute Cypher queries for code structure-aware retrieval. This provides flexibility through a general-purpose query language, but the graph schema captures only structural relationships (modules, classes, functions, and their containment, inheri-tance, and call edges) without data-flow information. KGCompass [ 39 ] constructs a repository-aware knowledge graph that links repository artifacts (issues, pull requests) with codebase entities (files, classes, functions) and uses path-guided retrieval to narrow the search space to the top 20 candidate functions. Its novelty lies in integrating issue-level metadata into the graph, enabling the system to leverage historical repair patterns. However, KGCompass does not model intra-procedural data-flow relationships, and its graph granularity does not extend below the function level. The common limitation across these systems is that none constructs statement-level nodes, none models definition-use relationships, and none exposes a first-class data-flow slicing primitive to the agent. ARISE addresses this gap by extending the graph to statement granularity and adding intra-procedural def-use edges, which enable the get_dataflow_slice tool to answer the localization question “which statements affect this variable?” in a single query. Table 1 summarises a comparison of our approach with preexisting approaches. As shown in Table 1, no existing APR system provides a structured, queryable data-flow slice as a first-class agent tool. 

2.4 Program Slicing 

Program slicing is a formal decomposition technique that reduces a program to a minimal subset of statements, known as a slice, which preserves the original behavior relative to a specific slicing criterion C = ⟨𝑝, 𝑉 ⟩, where 𝑝 is a program point and 𝑉 is a set of variables [ 34 ]. This method is essential for simplifying program comprehension during debugging and testing by isolating relevant logic from non-contributing code. The two primary techniques are backward slicing , which identifies statements that influence the value of 𝑉 at 𝑝 , and forward slicing , which determines which statements are influenced by 𝑉 at 𝑝 [10 ]. These approaches typically utilize a Program Dependence Graph (PDG), denoted as G = (𝑉 , 𝐸 𝑑 ∪ 𝐸 𝑐 ), to track both data-flow ( 𝐸 𝑑 ) and control-flow ( 𝐸 𝑐 )dependencies, ensuring the resulting slice is transitively complete and semantically accurate [ 33 ]. Despite its established value, program slicing has seen limited integration with LLM-based code agents. Existing APR systems that incorporate program analysis typically use it as a preprocessing step (e.g., extracting call graphs or computing code metrics) rather than as an interactive, queryable tool available during the agent’s reasoning loop. To our knowledge, no prior APR system exposes a structured, queryable data-flow slice as a first-class tool in the agent’s API. ARISE bridges this 6 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard       

> Fig. 1. ARISE pipeline overview. Phase 1: Given a repository snapshot, ARISE first constructs a multi-granularity program graph that combines structural relationships with intra-procedural data-flow edges (definition-use chains at statement level). Phase 2: We augment the agentic toolset with three tiers of tools. Tier 1 provides structural navigation. Tier 2 adds data-flow slicing, allowing the agent to trace how variables are defined and consumed. Tier 3 assembles the collected evidence into a ranked, token-budgeted context bundle. The SWE-agent tools are kept fixed in all experiments. Phase 3: An LLM-based agent then interacts with this graph through a three-tier tool API. The agent produces either a ranked list of fault locations (localization task) or a unified diff (repair task).

gap by implementing intra-procedural backward and forward slicing over def-use edges in the repository graph and exposing the result through get_dataflow_slice , allowing the agent to invoke slicing on demand during multi-turn reasoning. This design treats program analysis not as a static preprocessing step but as an actionable reasoning primitive. 

3 Methodology 

This section formulates the problem (Section 3.1 and describes ARISE’s three components, namely the multi-granularity repository graph (Section 3.2), the three-tier tool API (Section 3.3), and the agent loop and evaluation protocol (Sections 3.4–3.5). Figure 1 gives a high-level view of the pipeline. ARISE augments an autonomous agent with a set of specialized tools designed to navigate the complexities of large-scale repositories by representing codebases as multi-granularity program graphs. As illustrated in Figure 1, our approach centers on a hierarchical interaction model. By combining high-level structural semantics with fine-grained intra-procedural data-flow information and context bundling tools, ARISE enables an LLM-based agent to perform systematic exploration. The agentic toolset allows broad architectural navigation and precise evidence gathering through a specialized three-tier API, ultimately synthesizing these insights to perform localized fault identification or automated code repair. 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

Given a natural-language issue description 𝐼 and a repository snapshot R at a fixed commit, the APR task is to produce a unified diff ˆ𝑝 such that applying ˆ𝑝 to R causes all instance-specific tests to pass. We study this task on SWE-bench Lite [ 13 ], which provides 300 real GitHub issues from ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 7

11 Python open-source projects, each paired with a gold patch and a project-specific test harness. SWE-bench Lite has been adopted as a standard evaluation suite by a number of recent systems [3, 22–24, 36, 39, 42, 43]. We study two separate tasks using ARISE: (1) fault localization identifies the files, functions, and lines that must be changed, and (2) repair generates and validates the diff. We evaluate these tasks independently, each with its own system prompt and output format. 

Localization. Given (𝐼, R) , the agent returns a ranked list L = [( 𝑓 𝑖 , 𝑔 𝑖 , ℓ 𝑖 )] 𝑘 𝑖 =1 where 𝑓 𝑖 is a file path, 𝑔 𝑖 is an enclosing function or method name, and ℓ𝑖 is a line number. 

Repair. Given (𝐼, R) , the agent returns a unified diff ˆ𝑝 such that applying ˆ𝑝 to R causes all instance-specific tests to pass. Running the two tasks independently allows us to isolate the contribution of the ARISE graph tools to localization quality separately from their contribution to repair success (Section 3.5). 

3.2 Multi-Granularity Repository Graph 

ARISE represents a Python repository as a directed, typed property graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 ) that unifies two kinds of information, which are (i) structural relationships, representing how the codebase is organised into packages, modules, classes, functions, and statements; and (ii) data-flow rela-tionships, representing how variable values are defined and propagated within functions. Nodes 

𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 carry a type from {Directory , Module , Class , Function , Method , Statement } to-gether with source-location attributes ( file_path , start_line , end_line ). Edges 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 carry a type from {Contains , Imports , ImportedBy , Calls , CalledBy , Inherits , DataflowDefUse ,

DataflowUseDef }. Construction proceeds in two independent passes. 

Structural pass. We parse every .py file with Python’s ast module. A first traversal emits Direc-tory , Module , Class , Function , and Method nodes and adds Contains , Imports /ImportedBy ,and Inherits edges. Inter-module Calls /CalledBy edges require a second pass, so we record tuples 

(caller_id , callee_raw_name ) for every call site in the first traversal, then resolve callee_raw_name 

against the import-alias map of the caller’s module. Call-graph edges are used by downstream tools for traversal; spurious edges (false positives) cause agents to follow incorrect paths, which can be more harmful than missing edges (false negatives). We therefore restrict resolution to unambiguous cases, specifically direct function calls and qualified module.function() calls where the module alias is known, and silently drop dynamic dispatch through attribute access. 

Program graph pass. The goal of this pass is to extract data-flow relationships. To enable data-flow slicing, we need to know for each variable use inside a function, which statement last defined that variable . This definition-use (def-use) relationship is the semantic unit that the agent queries. A backward slice from variable 𝑣 at statement 𝑠 follows DataflowUseDef edges to find where 𝑣 was defined, while a forward slice follows DataflowDefUse edges to find where 𝑣 is subsequently consumed. For every Function and Method node, we first walk the function body and emit one Statement 

node per top-level AST statement (i.e., a direct child of the function body in the AST), recording its start_line and end_line and connecting it to the enclosing function via a Contains edge. 

Statement nodes are the endpoints of all data-flow edges, meaning that each DataflowDefUse 

or DataflowUseDef edge connects two Statement nodes (the defining statement and the using statement), not individual variable name occurrences. We then perform an intra-procedural analysis to connect Statement nodes via DataflowDefUse 

and DataflowUseDef edges. 8 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard 

• Definitions are statements where a variable receives a value: ast.Assign , ast.AugAssign ,

ast.AnnAssign , loop targets ( ast.For ), context-manager targets ( ast.With ), and function parameters. Augmented assignments (e.g., x += 1 ) count as both a use and a definition of the target variable. 

• Uses are statements where a variable’s current value is read: ast.Name nodes appearing in a 

Load context. 

• For each use of variable 𝑣 at statement 𝑠 , we find the last preceding definition of 𝑣 in textual source order within the same function body, respecting lexical scope ( global /nonlocal declarations are handled explicitly). We emit a directed DataflowDefUse edge from the defining statement to 𝑠 , and the reverse DataflowUseDef edge. In summary, this pass produces Statement nodes (one per top-level AST statement in each analysed function body) and DataflowDefUse /DataflowUseDef edges (one directed pair per definition–use relationship identified by the reaching-definition scan). 

3.3 Agentic Tool API 

Sections 3.1 and 3.2 establish what the agent must accomplish and what information is available to it. The agent must return either a ranked fault-location list or a valid patch; the graph 𝐺 stores the structural and data-flow evidence that supports that decision. The missing piece is the interface 

between the backbone model and 𝐺 . ARISE provides this interface as a set of typed, JSON-schema-annotated functions, collectively called the agentic tool API , that the backbone can invoke in any order across the turns of a session. A typical agent session follows three stages. First, the agent identifies candidate code entities by keyword search or structural proximity ( navigation ). Second, it gathers data-flow evidence about those candidates by querying which statements defined, used, or propagated a suspicious variable (analysis ). Third, it assembles the collected evidence into a ranked, token-budget-constrained context package and commits to a fault hypothesis or generates a patch ( assembly ). No fixed sequence is imposed; the agent chooses which tools to call and in what order at each turn. These three stages correspond to three tiers of tools, which we separate for exposition and ablation. Each tier can be added to the agent’s tool schema independently, isolating the contribution of that evidence layer (Section 3.5). Tier 1 provides structural retrieval, including searching and traversing the call/import graph, and reproduces the capabilities of prior structural-graph systems (Table 1). Tier 2 adds data-flow slicing. Tier 3 provides context bundling and heuristic suspect ranking. The graph 𝐺 is the storage layer for all three tiers; the tools described below are the query layer. All tools accept a RetrievalSession , which is a persistent object holding 𝐺 , a TF-IDF entity index, and an enclosing-scope index, so that index structures are built once and shared across all tool calls within a session. 

3.3.1 Tier 1: Structural Retrieval. These five tools operate on the structural portion of 𝐺 and collec-tively reproduce the capabilities of prior structural-graph systems [ 7 , 24 , 39 , 42 ]. They constitute the ARISE-Structural ablation baseline. 

search_entities performs TF-IDF search over entity names, file paths, and docstring first paragraphs, returning up to 𝑘 candidates with relevance scores. 

traverse_relations runs a breadth-first traversal from a seed node along a specified set of edge types, up to a configurable hop count and node budget. 

get_enclosing_scopes maps a (file, line) pair to the enclosing Function , Class , and 

Module nodes. This is the primary interface for grounding a stack-trace frame in 𝐺 .

get_code_span returns raw source text for a (file, start_line, end_line) range. ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 9

get_entity_info returns metadata and edge-degree summary for any node identifier. 

3.3.2 Tier 2: Dataflow Slicing. get_dataflow_slice traces how a named variable flows through its enclosing function via the intra-procedural def-use edges in 𝐺 . The agent specifies a seed 

(file, line, variable) triple and a direction: backward to trace where the value was defined, 

forward to trace where it is subsequently consumed, or both . The tool maps the seed line to the corresponding Statement node, executes a bounded BFS over DataflowUseDef edges (backward) or DataflowDefUse edges (forward), stops at function boundaries, and returns an ordered list of SliceStep records, each carrying the file path, line range, variable name, and the role of the variable at that statement ( parameter , definition , augmented assignment , use , etc.). If the seed line has no Statement node (e.g., it falls outside any analyzed function), get_dataflow_slice returns an empty slice with an explanatory note; the agent system prompt specifies get_code_span as the fallback in that case. 

3.3.3 Tier 3: Context Bundling and Ranking. build_context_bundle assembles a ranked set of code spans under a configurable token budget (default 8 000 tokens). Given a set of seed entity IDs 

S and optionally a set of DataflowSlice objects D, each candidate code span 𝑐 is scored as: score (𝑐 ) = 𝛼 · rel (𝑐 ) + 𝛽 · prox (𝑐 ) + 𝛾 · 1[𝑐 ∈ D] (1) where rel (𝑐 ) is the TF-IDF relevance of 𝑐 ’s entity to the issue text, prox (𝑐 ) is the inverse hop distance from 𝑐 to the nearest seed entity in the Calls /Imports subgraph, and 1[𝑐 ∈ D] is an indicator that 

𝑐 appears in at least one slice step. Weights 𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾 are fixed heuristic constants (not learned) set to 1.0, 0.5, and 1.5 respectively, chosen to up-weight slice membership over structural proximity. Spans are then greedily packed in descending score order until the token budget is exhausted. The tool supports three strategies: structural_only (D = ∅, sets 𝛾 = 0), slices_only (𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0), and hybrid (Equation 1 as stated). 

rank_suspect_regions provides heuristic ranking of suspicious functions given the issue text and an optional stack trace. Stack frames are parsed into seed functions via get_enclosing_scopes ;the seed set is then extended with search_entities results filtered to function and method types, expanded through the Calls /CalledBy subgraph up to two hops, and scored by the same linear combination used in build_context_bundle (with slice membership set to zero on the first call, and updated as the agent invokes get_dataflow_slice later in the session). This tool serves as a structural surrogate for inter-procedural data-flow: when the root cause lies in a callee rather than the function that raises the symptom, Calls graph proximity brings the relevant callee into the suspect list even though the slice cannot cross the call boundary. 

3.4 Agent Loop 

Base framework. ARISE builds on SWE-agent [ 40 ], which provides the agent-computer interface, the multi-turn execution loop, and the patch-generation sub-agent. We do not modify SWE-agent’s core loop or its bash/file-editor tools. ARISE’s contribution is the program-graph tool layer injected into the tool schema available to the backbone model at every turn. 

Inference stack. All backbone models are served locally using vLLM [ 15 ] via its OpenAI-compatible chat completions API, which SWE-agent supports natively. The primary backbone for all reported ex-periments is Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct [ 12 ], a 32B open-source code language model with native support for OpenAI-format function calling. We use this model because multi-hop APR localization (chain queries of the form search_entities → traverse_relations → get_dataflow_slice 

spanning five to ten sequential tool calls) requires the model to maintain a coherent plan across turns, which smaller models in preliminary runs failed to do reliably. 10 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard 

Algorithm 1 SWE-agent loop as used in ARISE, shared by both localization and repair tasks (one instance). T = TSWE ∪ T ARISE where TSWE are SWE-agent’s built-in tools and TARISE are the ARISE graph tools (Sections 3.3.1–3.3.3). The system prompt 𝑃 and answer schema differ by task: 

localization returns a ranked list of (file, fn, line) triples; repair returns a unified diff ˆ𝑝 .

Require: Issue 𝐼 , task prompt 𝑃 , session G, tool set T , max turns 𝑇 max  

> 1:

𝐻 ← [ 𝑃, user: 𝐼 ] 

> 2:

for 𝑡 = 1, . . . ,𝑇 max do  

> 3:

𝑟 ← LLM (𝐻, T )  

> 4:

if 𝑟 is terminal answer then  

> 5:

break  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

result ← T .dispatch (𝑟 . tool_call ) ⊲ SWE-agent or ARISE tool  

> 8:

𝐻 ← 𝐻 ∥ [ 𝑟, tool_result: result ] 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

if no terminal answer produced then  

> 11:

𝑟 ← LLM (𝐻 ∥ [ “produce final answer now” ], T )  

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

return ParseAnswer (𝑟, 𝑃 ) ⊲ ranked location list or unified diff, depending on task The Qwen3-4B-Instruct model [ 38 ] is used exclusively for generating the summaries in the 

explain_slice tool. 

Task prompts and response formats. The two evaluation tasks use distinct system prompts and require different output formats from the agent. In the localization task , the system prompt instructs the agent to identify and rank suspicious code locations; the terminal-answer format is a structured list of {file, function, start_line, end_line, score} records, parsed by a deterministic regex extractor. In the repair task , the system prompt instructs the agent to produce a fix for the reported issue; the terminal-answer format is a unified diff ( .patch ), applied to the repository snapshot and evaluated against the project test suite. In both tasks the system prompt is extended with tool-schema descriptions for the ARISE graph tools; no other task-specific prompt engineering is applied, and the tool docstrings serve as the sole description of each tool’s semantics. 

Multi-turn protocol. Algorithm 1 describes the agent loop, which follows SWE-agent’s standard protocol. At each turn the backbone receives the full conversation history and either emits a tool call in JSON (dispatched to either a SWE-agent built-in or a ARISE graph function depending on the tool name) or emits a terminal answer. The loop terminates when the model produces a terminal answer or when the maximum turn count 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 is reached; in the latter case the model is prompted once more with “You must now produce a final answer.” The structured answer is extracted by a deterministic regex parser and evaluated against the gold patch (Section 3.5). 

Tool availability by condition. In ARISE-Structural , the agent’s tool schema includes only Tier 1 tools, directly comparable to LocAgent [ 7 ] and RepoGraph [ 24 ]. In ARISE-Slicing , Tier 2 (get_dataflow_slice ) is added. In ARISE-Full , all three tiers are available. In ARISE-Coarse ,Tier 1 and Tier 2 tool schemas are present but the graph is built without Statement nodes or 

Dataflow edges, so get_dataflow_slice always returns an empty slice; this separates the effect of the tool API from the effect of the data-flow graph. The ARISE-ExplainSlice condition extends ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 11 

ARISE-Slicing by adding explain_slice , which appends a 2–4-sentence natural-language sum-mary to each get_dataflow_slice response. Across all conditions the system prompt structure, maximum turn count, and token budget are held constant. 

3.5 Evaluation Protocol 

Localization metrics. These metrics evaluate the ranked (file, function, line) list returned by the localization task . Localization performance is assessed at three granularity levels against the ground-truth patch. 

File level. The gold file set is the set of files modified by the gold patch. We report File Recall@ 𝑘 

(𝑘 ∈ { 1, 3, 5}), defined as the fraction of instances where at least one gold file appears among the agent’s top-𝑘 predicted files, and File MRR , the mean reciprocal rank of the first gold file. 

Function level. The gold function set is obtained by mapping each diff hunk to its enclosing function or method via get_enclosing_scopes . We report Function Recall@ 𝑘 (𝑘 ∈ { 1, 3, 5}), 

Function MRR , and Function F1@ 𝑘 , the harmonic mean of precision@ 𝑘 and recall@ 𝑘 , which penalizes over-prediction. 

Line level. The gold line set is the union of all lines touched by the gold patch ( +/- diff lines, exclud-ing context lines and blank lines). We report Line Recall@ 𝑘 (𝑘 ∈ { 1, 5, 10 }), Coverage@budget 

(the fraction of gold lines covered by the build_context_bundle output (Equation 1) under the 8 000-token budget, measuring retrieval quality independently of the agent’s reasoning), and IoU ,the mean intersection-over-union of predicted and gold line sets across instances. For ablation studies that do not use build_context_bundle (RAG , ARISE-Structural , ARISE-Coarse ), Cover-age@budget is computed on a BM25 top-𝑘 window of equivalent token size, providing a comparable retrieval quality measure. 

Repair metric. This metric evaluates the unified diff returned by the repair task . Pass@1 is the fraction of instances where the agent’s first generated patch passes all instance tests. We additionally report the Spearman rank correlation between function Recall@1 and Pass@1 across the 300 instances within each condition, which tests whether localization quality is the dominant predictor of repair success. 

4 Results 4.1 Experimental Setup 

Benchmark. We evaluate on SWE-bench Lite [ 13 ], comprising 300 real GitHub issues from 11 Python open-source repositories (Django, Flask, Sympy, Matplotlib, Pytest, Scikit-learn, and others). Each instance pairs a natural-language issue description with a gold patch and a project-specific test harness. 

Backbone model. The backbone for all reported experiments is Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct [ 12 ], served locally via vLLM [ 15 ]. The maximum agent turn count is 40; the token budget for build_context_bundle 

is 8 000 tokens per context assembly call. The Qwen3-4B-Instruct model [ 38 ] is used only for gener-ating natural-language summaries in explain_slice .

Ablation Conditions. Table 2 summarizes the ablation conditions used to determine the effect of each component (RQ3). All ARISE conditions share the same agent system prompt, maximum turn count, backbone, and evaluation harness; the only variable is the set of tools available to the agent. The 𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾 of Equation 1 have been set to 1.0, 0.5, and 1.5, respectively. 

Baselines. RAG retrieves files by BM25 similarity to the issue text with no graph and no agent loop, providing a lower bound attributable to lexical overlap alone. The SWE-agent baseline runs the 12 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard 

Table 2. Ablation conditions. All use Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct. All ARISE conditions use the SWE-agent framework, augmenting it with additional tools. 

Condition Tools Purpose 

Baselines 

RAG BM25 over raw files (no graph or agent) Static retrieval lower bound SWE-agent SWE-agent built-in tools (no graph) Agentic baseline 

ARISE conditions 

ARISE-Structural Tier 1 only LocAgent / RepoGraph parity 

ARISE-Coarse Tier 1 + 2 schemas; no Stmt nodes Isolates tool API vs. graph 

ARISE-Slicing Tier 1 + 2 Primary novelty condition 

ARISE-Full Tier 1 + 2 + 3 Best system 

ARISE-ExplainSlice Tier 1 + 2 + explain_slice NL mediation ablation 

Table 3. File- and function-level localization on SWE-bench Lite (300 instances). R@ 𝑘 = Recall@ 𝑘 . Best per column in bold. The SWE-agent baseline uses the same localization prompt and output format as all ARISE conditions. 

File Function Condition R@1 R@3 MRR R@1 R@3 F1@3 MRR 

Baselines 

RAG 30.0 42.0 0.33 15.0 25.0 0.14 0.18 SWE-agent 57.0 72.0 0.60 43.0 58.0 0.39 0.48 

ARISE conditions 

ARISE-Structural 62.0 77.0 0.65 50.0 65.0 0.45 0.54 

ARISE-Coarse 62.0 77.0 0.65 51.0 65.0 0.46 0.54 

ARISE-Slicing 65.0 80.0 0.68 57.0 72.0 0.52 0.60 

ARISE-ExplainSlice 65.0 80.0 0.68 57.0 72.0 0.52 0.60 

ARISE-Full 67.0 82.0 0.70 60.0 75.0 0.55 0.63 

unmodified SWE-agent framework [ 40 ] with Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct and its standard built-in tools (file search, grep, file editor) but without any ARISE graph tools. To make the localization results directly comparable, the SWE-agent baseline uses the same system prompt that instructs the agent to return a ranked list of (file, function, line) locations, ensuring that the evaluation protocol and output format are identical across all conditions. ARISE-Structural reproduces the structural graph retrieval capabilities of LocAgent [ 7 ] and RepoGraph [ 24 ] under the same backbone and evaluation harness. Pass@1 numbers from the original papers use different backbone models (GPT-4o); they appear in Table 5 for context only and are not directly comparable. 

4.2 RQ1: Effect of ARISE on Localization 

Tables 3 and 4 report localization performance. Results are measured against the ranked (file, function, line) list returned by the localization task (Section 3.5). 

Comparison with baselines. The SWE-agent baseline achieves File Recall@1 of 57.0, Function Recall@1 of 43.0, and Line Recall@1 of 26.0. These numbers sit 27.0, 28.0, and 21.0 points above 

RAG respectively, reflecting the large benefit of SWE-agent’s interactive agent loop over static BM25 retrieval. However, even the lowest ARISE condition ( ARISE-Structural ) outperforms the ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 13                                           

> Table 4. Line-level localization and retrieval quality on all 300 instances. For conditions without
> build_context_bundle , Coverage@budget is computed on a BM25 top-𝑘 window of equivalent token size. Best per column in bold.
> Line Recall@ 𝑘 Retrieval quality Condition @1 @5 @10 Cov@bud IoU
> Baselines
> RAG 5.0 12.0 18.0 20.0 0.06 SWE-agent 26.0 43.0 53.0 53.0 0.21
> ARISE conditions
> ARISE-Structural 31.0 48.0 59.0 61.0 0.26
> ARISE-Coarse 32.0 49.0 60.0 62.0 0.27
> ARISE-Slicing 38.0 59.0 71.0 71.0 0.33
> ARISE-ExplainSlice 38.0 59.0 71.0 71.0 0.33
> ARISE-Full 41.0 62.0 74.0 75.0 0.36

SWE-agent baseline by 5.0 points at file level, 7.0 points at function level, and 5.0 points at line level. This gap indicates that SWE-agent’s built-in tools, while useful for ad-hoc code exploration, cannot substitute for the structured graph-based navigation that ARISE’s Tier 1 tools provide. 

Overall ARISE gains. The best-performing condition, ARISE-Full , achieves File Recall@1 of 67.0, Function Recall@1 of 60.0, and Line Recall@1 of 41.0, improving over the SWE-agent baseline by 10.0, 17.0, and 15.0 points respectively. The improvement grows at finer granularities. At file level the gain is 10.0 points, at function level 17.0 points, and at line level 15.0 points. This pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that file identification is relatively well-served by interactive exploration and lexical signals, whereas function- and line-level localization benefits substantially from the structural and data-flow evidence that only the ARISE graph tools can provide. The steepest single-step improvement occurs between ARISE-Structural and ARISE-Slicing ,where data-flow slicing is introduced. Function Recall@1 increases by 7.0 points (50.0 → 57.0), Line Recall@1 by 7.0 points (31.0 → 38.0), and Line IoU by 0.07 (0.26 → 0.33). The corresponding file-level gain is smaller (3.0 points), confirming that the get_dataflow_slice tool provides the most leverage at within-file granularities where it can trace variable definitions and uses directly. Coverage@budget increases from 61.0 to 71.0, reflecting that the slice-membership boost ( 𝛾 in Equation 1) concentrates the token budget on spans causally connected to the faulty variable. 

ARISE-Full adds a further 3.0 points at function level (57.0 → 60.0) and 3.0 points at line level (38.0 → 41.0) over ARISE-Slicing , attributable to the Tier 3 tools ( build_context_bundle and 

rank_suspect_regions ) that assemble and re-rank evidence under a token budget. In summary, ARISE substantially improves localization at all granularity levels compared to both baselines, with the largest gains at the function and line levels where the localization bottleneck is most acute. 

4.3 RQ2: Effect of ARISE on Bug Repair 

Table 5 reports end-to-end repair results. Pass@1 reflects whether the agent’s first generated patch passes all instance tests (Section 3.5). 14 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard                                                           

> Table 5. End-to-end repair on SWE-bench Lite (300 instances). Pass@1 = fraction of instances where the first patch passes all tests. Avg. tok. = per-instance total (input + output, all turns, ×1000 ). 𝜌 = Spearman rank correlation between Function Recall@1 and Pass@1. Literature rows use different backbones and are not directly comparable. Rows marked by * are adopted from [24].
> Method Backbone Pass@1 Resolved Avg. tok. ( ×1000 )𝝆
> Baselines
> RAG Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct 2.67% 813 0.05 SWE-agent Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct 17.3% 52 510 0.38
> ARISE conditions
> ARISE-Structural Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct 19.0% 57 531 0.42
> ARISE-Coarse Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct 19.5% 59 535 0.43
> ARISE-Slicing Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct 21.0% 63 550 0.51
> ARISE-Full Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct 22.0% 66 560 0.53
> Literature
> SWE-agent* GPT-4o 18.3% 55 498 —RepoGraph+SWE-agent* GPT-4o 20.3% 61 519 —SWE-agent Qwen3-4B 12.0% 36 391 —RepoGraph+SWE-agent Qwen3-4B 12.7% 38 422 —

Comparison with baselines. The RAG baseline achieves only 2.67% Pass@1 (8/300), confirming that static BM25 retrieval without an agent loop is insufficient for repository-level repair. The SWE-agent baseline achieves 17.3% (52/300), a +14 .6% absolute improvement that demonstrates the value of interactive exploration tools for navigating large codebases. However, the first ARISE condition, 

ARISE-Structural , extends this further to 19.0% (57/300), outperforming the SWE-agent baseline by +1.7% (5 additional instances) and confirming that graph-based tools provide a qualitatively different kind of evidence than SWE-agent’s standard file-navigation tools. 

Overall ARISE gains. ARISE-Full achieves Pass@1 of 22.0% (66/300), a gain of 4.7% (14 instances) over the SWE-agent baseline, and 19.3% (58 instances) over the RAG baseline. The intermediate condition ARISE-Slicing achieves 21.0% (63/300), already outperforming ARISE-Structural by 2.0% (6 additional instances). Within the same framework, ARISE-Slicing with Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct (21.0%) also outperforms the published SWE-agent + RepoGraph result with GPT-4o (20.3%). This comparison is informational; the controlled comparison is ARISE-Structural vs. 

ARISE-Slicing on the same backbone. 

Localization predicts repair. The Spearman correlation 𝜌 between Function Recall@1 and Pass@1 increases monotonically from 0.05 ( RAG ) through 0.38 (SWE-agent) and 0.42 ( ARISE-Structural )to 0.53 ( ARISE-Full ). The jump from 0.42 to 0.51 between ARISE-Structural and ARISE-Slicing 

indicates that the Pass@1 gain from slicing is mechanistically linked to localization precision; instances where get_dataflow_slice narrows the candidate set to the correct function are dispro-portionately likely to be repaired. This confirms that localization quality is the binding constraint on repair success in the ARISE setting, and that the localization gains reported in RQ1 translate directly into repair improvements. The failure-mode analysis is presented in Section 5.2. 

4.4 RQ3: Component Contributions 

This subsection isolates the contribution of each ARISE component through controlled ablation comparisons. Tables 3–5 provide the quantitative basis; Table 2 defines the conditions. ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 15 

Structural graph (SWE-agent → ARISE-Structural ). Adding Tier 1 graph tools to the SWE-agent scaffold raises File Recall@1 by 5.0 points (Table 3), Function Recall@1 by 7.0 points (Table 3), and Pass@1 by 1.7% (Table 5). Compared to the static RAG baseline, the gains are substantially larger (File +32.0, Function +35.0, Pass@1 +16.3%), reflecting the combined effect of the agent loop and structural graph navigation. The steeper gain at finer granularity is consistent with the structural graph providing caller/callee topology that neither lexical similarity nor ad-hoc file exploration can capture [ 7 , 24 , 39 ]. The cross-system calibration is best assessed against the SWE-agent baseline; the +1.7% repair gain from SWE-agent to ARISE-Structural is close to the +2.0% delta between SWE-agent and SWE-agent + RepoGraph on GPT-4o [ 24 ], suggesting a consistent estimate of what a structural graph contributes to APR. 

Data-flow slicing ( ARISE-Structural → ARISE-Slicing ). Adding Tier 2 yields the single largest within-tier improvement. Function Recall@1 increases by 7.0 points (50.0 → 57.0), Line IoU by 0.07 (0.26 → 0.33), and Pass@1 by 2.0% (19.0% → 21.0%, 6 additional instances). The get_dataflow_slice 

tool directly answers the question “which statements in this function use the suspicious variable and where was it last defined?”, a query that requires multiple traverse_relations hops to approximate in the structural-only setting and remains imprecise at line level. 

Context bundling ( ARISE-Slicing → ARISE-Full ). Adding Tier 3 yields a further +1.0% in Pass@1 (21.0% → 22.0%, 3 additional instances) and +3.0 points in Function Recall@1 (57.0 → 60.0). In total, the gain from the SWE-agent baseline to ARISE-Full decomposes as +1.7% (structural graph), +2.0% (data-flow slicing), and +1.0% (context bundling). 

Isolating graph data from tool schema ( ARISE-Coarse ). ARISE-Coarse makes the get_dataflow_slice 

tool schema available to the agent but builds the graph without Statement nodes or Dataflow 

edges; get_dataflow_slice therefore always returns an empty slice. Its metrics sit within 1.0 point of ARISE-Structural across the board (Function Recall@1 of 51.0 vs. 50.0; Pass@1 of 19.5% vs. 19.0%), confirming that the improvement observed in ARISE-Slicing is attributable to the data-flow graph itself and not to the mere presence of an additional tool in the agent schema. Across all four ablation steps, each ARISE tier delivers a consistent, additive improvement in both localization accuracy and end-to-end repair success. The structural graph alone accounts for the largest share of the gain over the bare SWE-agent scaffold, data-flow slicing produces the single largest within-system jump at fine-grained granularity, and context bundling provides a further incremental lift. The ARISE-Coarse control rules out tool-schema effects as a confound, isolating the data-flow graph itself as the active ingredient in Tier 2. Taken together, these results demonstrate that no single tier is redundant: removing any one degrades both localization and repair metrics, and the full ARISE-Full configuration—which integrates all three tiers—achieves the best performance across every reported metric. This confirms that ARISE’s design is not merely additive in a superficial sense but that each component targets a distinct gap in the agent’s ability to navigate and reason over repository structure. 

Natural-language mediation ( ARISE-ExplainSlice ). Table 6 reports the isolated comparison of 

ARISE-Slicing with and without explain_slice enabled. Adding explain_slice produces no measurable improvement in any metric ( 𝑝 > 0.99 on all) while adding 5,000 tokens per instance. At Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct scale, the agent reasons over the raw structured DataflowSlice output directly; the natural-language summary adds no information the model cannot derive from the structured representation. We therefore exclude 

explain_slice from the default ARISE configuration. 16 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard                                

> Table 6. Marginal contribution of explain_slice over the frozen ARISE-Slicing baseline. Significance tested with paired bootstrap ( 𝑛 =10 ,000 ).
> Condition Fn R@1 Fn MRR Line IoU Pass@1 Avg. tok.
> ARISE-Slicing 57.0 0.60 0.33 21.0% 550,000
> ARISE-ExplainSlice 57.0 0.60 0.33 21.0% 555,000
> Δ0.0 0.00 0.00 0.0% +5,000
> 𝑝 -value >0.99 >0.99 >0.99 >0.99 —

5 Discussion 5.1 Why Data-flow Slicing Helps 

The 2.0% improvement in Pass@1 from ARISE-Structural to ARISE-Slicing is mediated primarily by function-level localization. Function Recall@1 increases by 7.0 points (50.0 to 57.0), which is the single largest within-tier jump in the localization tables (RQ3, Section 4.4). The corresponding file-level gain is only 3.0 points, consistent with the observation that file identification is already well-served by keyword overlap and structural topology. An issue report typically names the module or class involved, making BM25 and search_entities sufficient for file-level localization in most instances. The bottleneck is within-file function identification, specifically distinguishing the method that contains the faulty assignment from its structurally adjacent callers and callees. 

get_dataflow_slice addresses this bottleneck directly. When the agent locates a suspicious line from an error trace or from search_entities , a backward slice from that line traces the variable’s definition chain within the enclosing function. The definition site is, by construction, the function that contains the bug, collapsing a multi-hop traversal problem into a single DataflowUseDef BFS. In the structural-only setting, the agent must approximate this by chaining traverse_relations 

calls over Calls and CalledBy edges, which expands the candidate set rather than narrowing it. The token cost data in Table 8 confirm this account; the 20,000-token net increase from ARISE-Structural to ARISE-Slicing is composed of 23,300 tokens of get_dataflow_slice calls partially offset by a 3,300-token reduction in traverse_relations volume (24,900 → 21,600), consistent with partial substitution of structural exploration by targeted slicing. The Coverage@budget gain (61.0 to 71.0) follows from the same mechanism. In the hybrid strategy, slice-step spans receive a 𝛾 = 1.5 bonus in Equation 1, which displaces structurally adjacent but semantically unrelated spans from the context window. The net effect is a more precise context bundle presented to the repair sub-agent, reducing the probability of generating a patch that modifies the wrong function. 

Graph-based tools vs. interactive exploration. The SWE-agent baseline provides a useful reference point for separating the effect of interactive agent exploration from the effect of structured graph tools . Despite having access to grep, file navigation, and a file editor, the unmodified SWE-agent achieves only 43.0 Function Recall@1 and 17.3% Pass@1, both well below ARISE-Structural 

(50.0 and 19.0%). This gap demonstrates that the value of graph-based tools lies not in providing additional actions per se, but in providing structurally precise actions that expose call-graph and import topology. The further gain from ARISE-Structural to ARISE-Slicing shows that even structural precision is insufficient; the agent needs semantic precision in the form of data-flow edges to identify the specific function within a file. The ARISE-Coarse condition provides a complementary isolation test. ARISE-Coarse makes the get_dataflow_slice tool schema available but builds the graph without Statement nodes or Dataflow edges, so every slice call returns empty. Its Function Recall@1 (51.0) sits within 1.0 ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 17                               

> Table 7. Failure-mode breakdown for ARISE-Slicing (𝑛 =237 failed instances) and ARISE-Full (𝑛 =234 ) in the bug repair task. Count = number of instances where the agent did not resolve the issue.
> ARISE-Slicing ARISE-Full
> Failure category Count %Count %
> Wrong file 107 45% 99 42% Right file, wrong fn 59 25% 58 25% Right fn, failed repair 47 20% 51 22% Incomplete localization 24 10% 26 11%

point of ARISE-Structural (50.0) and 6.0 points below ARISE-Slicing (57.0), confirming that the improvement is attributable to the data-flow graph layer and not to the mere presence of an additional tool in the agent schema. 

Cross-system calibration. The structural layer contributes +1.7% over the SWE-agent baseline (19.0 vs. 17.3%) and +16.3% over RAG (19.0 vs. 2.67%). The SWE-agent-to-ARISE-Structural 

delta (+1.7%) is close to the gap between SWE-agent and SWE-agent + RepoGraph on GPT-4o (+2.0%; 20.3 vs. 18.3%) [ 24 ]. Consistency across two different backbones suggests that a structural repository graph contributes approximately 2% to APR, independent of specific implementation. The SWE-agent baseline with Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct (17.3%) sits slightly below the published GPT-4o SWE-agent result (18.3%); both use the same SWE-agent harness, and the gap is attributable to the backbone rather than the tooling. The within-condition deltas are unaffected by this offset. 

5.2 Localization Precision Is the Binding Constraint on Repair 

Because the localization and repair tasks are run and measured independently (Section 3.5), the Spearman correlation 𝜌 between Function Recall@1 and Pass@1 quantifies how tightly localization quality determines repair success. The monotonic increase from 0.05 ( RAG ) through 0.38 (SWE-agent baseline) and 0.42 ( ARISE-Structural ) to 0.51 ( ARISE-Slicing ) and 0.53 ( ARISE-Full )indicates that repair success and localization quality become more tightly coupled as the agent gains access to more precise retrieval tools. This is not merely a correlation artefact; the token substitution pattern in Table 8 (traverse volume 24,900 → 21,600 tokens) shows the agent actively replacing structural exploration with targeted slicing, committing to a function-level hypothesis earlier and spending more of its budget on patch generation. Table 7 shows where the remaining failures concentrate. The dominant failure mode, “wrong file” at 45% of ARISE-Slicing failures ( 𝑛 = 107 of 237), is a direct consequence of the intra-procedural scope limit. get_dataflow_slice stops at Calls edges, so bugs whose root cause is a value mutated inside a callee are invisible to the backward slice. The 3-instance gain of ARISE-Full over ARISE-Slicing comes almost entirely from rank_suspect_regions expanding candidates through the 

Calls subgraph, reducing wrong-file failures from 45% to 42%. This is a structural surrogate, not a data-flow solution; the true fix (inter-procedural slicing) is the primary direction for future work (Section 5.5). The “right function, failed repair” category (20%) is orthogonal to localization quality. These instances are correctly localized but cannot be repaired by the agent, typically because the required change is a multi-hunk edit (one that modifies several non-contiguous code regions simultaneously) or involves a semantic invariant not visible in the local context. Better localization cannot raise the Pass@1 ceiling for this category; improvements here require a more capable repair agent (Section 5.5). 18 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard                                      

> Table 8. Mean token consumption per instance by tool type. —= tool unavailable. Totals include prompt and generation overhead not itemized above.
> Condition Search Traverse Slice Bundle Total
> Baselines
> RAG ————13,000 SWE-agent ————510,000
> ARISE conditions
> ARISE-Structural 5,100 24,900 ——531,000
> ARISE-Coarse 5,100 24,900 5,000 —535,000
> ARISE-Slicing 5,100 21,600 23,300 —550,000
> ARISE-Full 5,100 21,600 23,300 10,000 560,000

5.3 Large Code Models Consume Structured Analysis Output Directly 

The zero marginal contribution of explain_slice reported in RQ3 (Section 4.4, Table 6) merits further interpretation. explain_slice was originally motivated as a compression and translation layer, where a small model would summarize a structured DataflowSlice into natural language, making the slice accessible to backbone models that could not reliably parse typed step objects. At Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct, the raw structured representation — a list of (file, line, role, variable) step records — is sufficient for the model to reason over directly; the additional LLM call adds latency and 5,000 tokens per instance without providing information the model cannot derive itself. This result has a practical implication for system design: investing in the quality of the structured slice representation (accurate def-use edges, informative role labels, useful fallback messages) is more cost-effective than adding a summarization post-processing step. It also suggests a calibration point for future work; explain_slice may recover value at smaller model scales, where ,the ability to parse structured data is weaker. That experiment is left to future work; the present results justify excluding explain_slice from the default ARISE configuration. 

5.4 Token Cost and Efficiency 

Table 8 breaks down mean token consumption by tool type. The SWE-agent baseline consumes 510,000 tokens per instance with no graph tool overhead. The ARISE-Coarse slice column (5k tokens) represents empty-slice response overhead, confirming that the cost of a failed get_dataflow_slice call is small and does not explain the improvement in ARISE-Slicing . The 20,000-token net increase from ARISE-Structural to ARISE-Slicing 

comprises 23,300 tokens of get_dataflow_slice calls, partially offset by a 3,300-token reduction in traverse_relations volume (24,900 → 21,600). This substitution pattern indicates that the agent replaces broad structural exploration with targeted slicing when the tool is available, rather than performing both. The further 10,000-token increase from ARISE-Slicing to ARISE-Full 

reflects build_context_bundle and rank_suspect_regions calls. In exchange for a modest 3.8% cost increase over ARISE-Structural , ARISE-Slicing resolves 6 additional instances, giving an effective cost of ≈3,333 additional tokens per additionally resolved instance. 

5.5 Limitations 

Intra-procedural scope. The most significant architectural limitation of ARISE’s data-flow layer is that get_dataflow_slice does not cross Calls edges. A bug whose root cause is a value mutated ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 19 

inside a callee produces a symptom at the call site but a root cause in the callee’s body. The backward slice terminates at the function boundary, leaving the agent without a direct data-flow path to the bug. Wrong-file failures account for 45% of ARISE-Slicing failures ( 𝑛 = 107 of 237), the single largest failure category (Table 7). rank_suspect_regions partially compensates by expanding candidates through the Calls subgraph, which accounts for most of the 3-instance gain of ARISE-Full over ARISE-Slicing . However, this is a structural surrogate, not a data-flow solution, since rank_suspect_regions identifies callees by proximity in the call graph, not by tracing the specific variable that propagates the bug. Full inter-procedural slicing would require a summary-based or context-sensitive analysis, which significantly increases both implementation complexity and graph size. We treat this as the primary direction for future work. 

AST def-use approximation. The intra-procedural analysis covers approximately 90% of common Python assignment patterns (simple assignments, augmented assignments, loop targets, context-manager targets, function parameters). The remaining 10% of patterns are not instrumented: attribute access chains ( obj.attr = value ), *args /**kwargs propagation, globals() /locals() 

manipulation, and dynamic dispatch through __setattr__ are not modelled. For these patterns, 

get_dataflow_slice returns an empty slice, and the agent falls back to get_code_span . False-positive def-use edges can lead the agent to a wrong definition site. The scope stack maintained during the program graph pass handles common cases ( global /nonlocal , list comprehension scopes), but edge cases involving class-scope name resolution and walrus-operator assignments in comprehension conditions are not guaranteed to be correct. The practical effect of these approxima-tion errors on pass@1 is bounded by the coverage gap: at most 10% of instances can be adversely affected, and the net result is neutral degradation (empty slice, not wrong slice) in the majority of those cases. 

Benchmark scope. SWE-bench Lite covers Python only and is biased toward repositories with well-structured issue reports and deterministic test suites. The def-use analysis is Python-specific (it depends on ast node types that have no direct analogue in other languages). Generalization to statically typed languages (Java, TypeScript) would require language-specific frontends; generaliza-tion to dynamically typed languages with more complex scoping rules (JavaScript, Ruby) would require additional handling of prototype-based dispatch. 

5.6 Implications 

Structured graph tools transform agent-based exploration. The SWE-agent baseline demonstrates that an LLM agent equipped with general-purpose exploration tools (grep, file navigation, editing) can substantially outperform static BM25 retrieval for repair (17.3% vs. 2.67% Pass@1), yet remains limited by the lack of explicit code structure. Adding ARISE’s Tier 1 structural tools on top of the same SWE-agent scaffold yields a further 1.7 pp gain (19.0% Pass@1) and a 7.0-point improvement in Function Recall@1 (43.0 → 50.0). This gain arises because the structural graph exposes relationships that are invisible to text-based exploration. For example, search_entities maps an issue-report keyword to the specific function node in the graph, and traverse_relations follows Calls or 

Inherits edges to retrieve its callers or subclasses, tasks that would otherwise require the agent to manually grep for import statements and read through multiple files. The result is a more focused exploration trajectory; the agent reaches the relevant module in fewer turns and with less wasted token budget, which in turn leaves more capacity for downstream reasoning and patch generation. 

Context bundling closes the last mile. The Tier 3 tools contribute a further +1.0 pp Pass@1 and +3.0 points Function Recall@1 beyond slicing alone. While this increment is smaller than the structural or slicing gains, it addresses a practical bottleneck that the other tiers do not. After the agent has 20 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard 

identified candidate functions and traced their data-flow slices, it must assemble a coherent context package within the token budget before generating a patch. Without build_context_bundle , this assembly is left to the agent’s own multi-turn reasoning, which can be inefficient and inconsistent. The tool’s scoring function (Equation 1) automates this assembly by ranking spans according to relevance, structural proximity, and slice membership, ensuring that the repair sub-agent receives the most informative context within the budget. Similarly, rank_suspect_regions provides a structural surrogate for inter-procedural analysis by expanding the candidate set through the Calls 

subgraph, which accounts for most of the 3-instance gain of ARISE-Full over ARISE-Slicing 

by bringing relevant callees into scope even when the backward slice cannot cross the function boundary. 

Data-flow as a first-class retrieval primitive. The primary finding of this work is that exposing intra-procedural def-use slices as a first-class, queryable agent tool improves function- and line-level fault localization more than structural graph topology alone, and that this localization improvement translates directly into bug repair success. The mechanism is not that LLMs are better at reasoning over graph data than text. Rather, the slice reduces the search space the agent must explore: instead of traversing the call graph and inspecting multiple candidate functions, the agent can commit to a function-level hypothesis on the basis of a single backward slice and invest its remaining token budget in patch generation. This suggests a broader design principle for agent-facing code retrieval systems: the value of a retrieval primitive is proportional to how precisely it can answer the agent’s query, not to how much information it returns. A single get_dataflow_slice call that returns 5-8 causally connected statement spans is more useful than a traverse_relations call that returns 50 structurally adjacent nodes, because the agent can act on the former directly. 

Structured data is sufficient at 32B scale. The explain_slice result demonstrates that large code language models do not require natural-language mediation to consume structured program analysis output. The implication is that future APR systems should invest in the structure and completeness of the analysis layer rather than in post-processing to make analysis output more readable. Rich type annotations, precise role labels (parameter, augmented assignment, loop target), and informative fallback messages in the structured output are more valuable than an additional summarization LLM call. 

Cost efficiency of slicing. The slicing gain (6 additional instances resolved) costs approximately 20,000 additional tokens per instance, giving an effective rate of ≈3,333 additional tokens per additionally resolved instance. This is a favorable cost-performance ratio: a 3.8% token budget increase over ARISE-Structural yields a 10.5% increase in resolved instances. The metric most relevant in practice (additional instances resolved per additional GPU-hour) can be computed directly from Table 8 for the specific hardware configuration used. 

6 Conclusions 

We presented ARISE, a system that augments LLM-based software agents with a multi-granularity program graph and a three-tier tool API for repository-level fault localization and repair. The key contribution is exposing intra-procedural data-flow slicing as a first-class, queryable agent primitive, enabling the model to trace variable definitions and uses within a function in a single tool call. On SWE-bench Lite (300 issues, 11 Python repositories), ARISE improves Function Recall@1 by 17.0 points and Line Recall@1 by 15.0 points over the SWE-agent baseline, and achieves 22.0% Pass@1 (66/300), a 4.7% gain. Controlled ablations show that data-flow slicing produces the single largest component gain (+7.0 Function Recall@1, +2.0% Pass@1), that this gain is attributable ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 21 

to the graph data rather than the tool schema, and that large code models consume structured slice output directly without a natural-language intermediary. The graph builder and slicing API are designed as a framework-agnostic, drop-in toolset that any tool-use-capable agent can adopt without re-implementing the underlying analysis. The most impactful direction for future work is extending the data-flow analysis from intra-procedural to inter-procedural scope, since wrong-file failures caused by the inability to trace variable flow across call boundaries account for 45% of remaining errors. Additional directions include generalizing the approach to statically typed languages and integrating a more capable, iterative repair sub-agent to raise the Pass@1 ceiling for correctly localized instances. 

References 

[1] Miltiadis Allamanis, Marc Brockschmidt, and Mahmoud Khademi. 2018. Learning to Represent Programs with Graphs. In ICLR . https://miltos.allamanis.com/publicationfiles/allamanis2018learning/allamanis2018learning.pdf [2] Uri Alon, Meital Zilberstein, Omer Levy, and Eran Yahav. 2019. code2vec: Learning Distributed Representations of Code. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 3, POPL (2019), 40:1–40:29. doi:10.1145/3290353 [3] Amazon Web Services. 2024. Reimagining Software Development with the Amazon Q Developer Agent. https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-learning/reimagining-software-development-with-the-amazon-q-developer-agent/. AWS Machine Learning Blog. [4] Ramakrishna Bairi et al . 2024. CodePlan: Repository-level Coding using LLMs and Planning. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) (2024). doi:10.1145/3643757 [5] Sebastian Baltes, Oliver Moseler, Fabian Beck, and Stephan Diehl. 2017. Navigate, Understand, Communicate: How Developers Locate Performance Bugs. In ICPC . 260–270. doi:10.1109/ICPC.2017.21 [6] Andreas Bexell, Emma Söderberg, Christofer Rydenfält, and Sigrid Eldh. 2024. How Do Developers Approach Their First Bug in an Unfamiliar Code Base? An Exploratory Study of Large Program Comprehension. In PPIG .https://ppig.org/files/2024-PPIG-35th-bexell.pdf [7] Zhaoling Chen, Xiangru Tang, Gangda Deng, Fang Wu, Jialong Wu, Zhiwei Jiang, Viktor Prasanna, Arman Cohan, and Xingyao Wang. 2025. LocAgent: Graph-Guided LLM Agents for Code Localization. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) . Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 8697–8727. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.426 [8] Jeanne Ferrante, Karl J. Ottenstein, and Joe D. Warren. 1987. The Program Dependence Graph and Its Use in Optimization. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 9, 3 (1987), 319–349. doi:10.1145/24039.24041 [9] Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie Liu, Long Zhou, Nan Duan, et al . 2021. GraphCode-BERT: Pre-training Code Representations with Data Flow. In ICLR . https://openreview.net/forum?id=jLoC4ez43PZ [10] Susan Horwitz, Thomas Reps, and David Binkley. 1990. Interprocedural slicing using dependence graphs. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS) 12, 1 (1990), 26–60. [11] Soneya Binta Hossain, Nan Jiang, Qiang Zhou, Xiaopeng Li, Wen-Hao Chiang, Yingjun Lyu, Hoan Nguyen, and Omer Tripp. 2024. A deep dive into large language models for automated bug localization and repair. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering 1, FSE (2024), 1471–1493. [12] Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Kai Dang, An Yang, Rui Men, Fei Huang, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2024. Qwen2.5-Coder Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12186 (2024). [13] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 (2023). [14] James A Jones and Mary Jean Harrold. 2005. Empirical evaluation of the tarantula automatic fault-localization technique. In Proceedings of the 20th IEEE/ACM international Conference on Automated software engineering . 273–282. [15] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’23) . ACM. doi:10.1145/ 3600006.3613165 [16] Jia Li et al . 2025. LONGCODEU: Benchmarking Long-Context Language Models on Long Code Understanding. In 

ACL . https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1324.pdf [17] Chunyan Liu, Yan Lei, Huan Xie, Jinping Wang, Yue Yu, and David Lo. 2026. Survey on learning-based dynamic fault localization: From traditional machine learning to large language models. Comput. Surveys 58, 9 (2026), 1–39. [18] Jia Liu et al . 2024. RepoQA: Evaluating Long Context Code Understanding. In ICLR (Workshop/Poster) . https: //openreview.net/pdf?id=hK9YSrFuGf 22 Shahd Seddik and Fatemeh Fard 

[19] Tianyang Liu, Canwen Xu, and Julian McAuley. 2024. RepoBench: Benchmarking Repository-Level Code Auto-Completion Systems. In ICLR . https://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/ d191ba4c8923ed8fd8935b7c98658b5f-Paper-Conference.pdf [20] Wenjun Liu, Yihui Sun, Jiefeng Wei, Yiheng Li, Yiran Chen, Hai Zhao, Shuai Wang, Shizhe Fu, Ge Sun, and Kai Zhang. 2024. GraphCoder: Enhancing Repository-Level Code Completion via Coarse-to-Fine Retrieval Based on Code Context Graph. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) .IEEE/ACM, 570–582. doi:10.1145/3691620.3695054 [21] Xiangyan Liu, Bo Lan, Zhiyuan Hu, Yang Liu, Zhicheng Zhang, Fei Wang, Michael Qizhe Shieh, and Wenmeng Zhou. 2025. Codexgraph: Bridging large language models and code repositories via code graph databases. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) . 142–160. [22] Yingwei Ma, Qingping Yang, Rongyu Cao, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2025. Alibaba LingmaAgent: Improving Automated Issue Resolution via Comprehensive Repository Exploration. In Companion Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE Companion ’25) . ACM, New York, NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3696630.3728549 [23] Fangwen Mu, Junjie Wang, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Shoubin Li, and Qing Wang. 2025. EXPEREPAIR: Dual-Memory Enhanced LLM-based Repository-Level Program Repair. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10484 (2025). [24] Siru Ouyang, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Zilin Xiao, Zhihan Zhang, Mengzhao Jia, Jiawei Han, Hongming Zhang, and Dong Yu. 2025. RepoGraph: Enhancing AI Software Engineering with Repository-level Code Graph. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . https://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper_files/paper/2025/ file/4a4a3c197deac042461c677219efd36c-Paper-Conference.pdf [25] Mike Papadakis and Yves Le Traon. 2015. Metallaxis-FL: mutation-based fault localization. Software Testing, Verification and Reliability 25, 5-7 (2015), 605–628. [26] Shani Pearce, Abhay Singh, Luke Hales, Emma Finlayson, and Brett A. Becker. 2024. Needles in a Haystack: Student Struggles with Working on Large Code Bases. In SIGCSE . doi:10.1145/3702652.3744218 [27] Rachel Potvin and Josh Levenberg. 2016. Why Google Stores Billions of Lines of Code in a Single Repository. Commun. ACM 59, 7 (2016), 78–87. doi:10.1145/2854146 [28] Yihao Qin, Shangwen Wang, Yiling Lou, Jinhao Dong, Kaixin Wang, Xiaoling Li, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2024. Agentfl: Scaling llm-based fault localization to project-level context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16362 (2024). [29] Samuel Rando et al . 2025. Evaluating Coding LLMs at 1M Context Windows: LongCodeBench. OpenReview preprint. https://openreview.net/pdf?id=GFPoM8Ylp8 [30] Melika Sepidband, Hamed Taherkhani, Hung Viet Pham, and Hadi Hemmati. 2026. RGFL: Reasoning Guided Fault Localization for Automated Program Repair Using Large Language Models. arXiv e-prints (2026), arXiv–2601. [31] Akihiro Takahashi, Yoshiki Higo, and Shinji Kusumoto. 2021. An Extensive Study on Smell-Aware Bug Localization. 

Journal of Systems and Software 177 (2021), 110957. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2021.110957 [32] Tianyi Tang, Tianyi Xu, Sumon Karmakar, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2023. An Empirical Study of Developer Behaviors for Validating and Repairing AI-Generated Code. In PLATEAU@SPLASH . https://toby.li/files/plateau23-tang-copilot.pdf [33] Frank Tipp. 1995. A survey of program slicing techniques. Journal of programming languages 3, 3 (1995), 121–189. [34] Mark Weiser. 1981. Program slicing. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 4 (1981), 352–357. [35] W Eric Wong, Ruizhi Gao, Yihao Li, Rui Abreu, Franz Wotawa, and Dongcheng Li. 2023. Software fault localization: An overview of research, techniques, and tools. Handbook of Software Fault Localization: Foundations and Advances 

(2023), 1–117. [36] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. 2025. Demystifying LLM-Based Software Engineering Agents. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering 2, FSE (2025), 801–824. doi:10.1145/3715754 [37] Fabian Yamaguchi, Nico Golde, Daniel Arp, and Konrad Rieck. 2014. Modeling and Discovering Vulnerabilities with Code Property Graphs. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy . 590–604. doi:10.1109/SP.2014.44 [38] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. 2025. Qwen3 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 

(2025). [39] Boyang Yang, Jiadong Ren, Shunfu Jin, Yang Liu, Feng Liu, Bach Le, and Haoye Tian. 2025. Enhancing Repository-Level Software Repair via Repository-Aware Knowledge Graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21710 (2025). ARISE: A Repository-level Graph Representation and Toolset for Agentic Fault Localization and Program Repair 23 

[40] Jian Yang, Carlos E. Jiménez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, et al . 2024. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/5a7c947568c1b1328ccc5230172e1e7c-Paper-Conference.pdf [41] Seohyun Youm, Hojun Yeon, Eunjong Kim, Eunjong Lee, Eunjong Park, et al . 2018. Bench4BL: Reproducibility Study on the Performance of IR-based Bug Localization. In Proceedings of ISSTA . doi:10.1145/3213846.3213856 [42] Zhongming Yu, Hejia Zhang, Yujie Zhao, Hanxian Huang, Matrix Yao, Ke Ding, and Jishen Zhao. 2025. OrcaLoca: An LLM Agent Framework for Software Issue Localization. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 267) . PMLR, 73416–73436. https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v267/yu25x.html [43] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. AutoCodeRover: Autonomous Program Improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA ’24) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1592–1604. doi:10.1145/3650212.3680384 [44] Yaqin Zhou, Shangqing Liu, Jing Kai Siow, Xiaoning Du, and Yang Liu. 2019. Devign: Effective Vulnerability Iden-tification by Learning Comprehensive Program Semantics via Graph Neural Networks. In NeurIPS . 10197–10207. https://papers.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/49265d2447bc3bbfe9e76306ce40a31f-Paper.pdf