Title: PassiveQA: A Three-Action Framework for Epistemically Calibrated Question Answering via Supervised Finetuning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.04565v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 01:37:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

# PassiveQA: A Three-Action Framework for Epistemically Calibrated Question Answering via Supervised Finetuning 

## Madhav S Baidya 

Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi 

madhavsukla.baidya.chy22@itbhu.ac.in 

Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved strong performance in question answering and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), yet they implicitly assume that user queries are fully specified and answerable. In real-world settings, queries are often incomplete, ambiguous, or missing critical variables, leading models to produce overconfident or hallucinated responses. Existing approaches lack mechanisms to decide whether a query should be answered, clarified, or abstained from. In this work, we study decision-aware query resolution under incomplete information ,where a model must jointly infer the sufficiency of available information and select an appropriate action: Answer , Ask , or Abstain . We show that standard and enhanced RAG systems do not consistently exhibit such epistemic awareness, defaulting to answer generation even when information is insufficient. To address this, we propose PassiveQA , a three-action decision framework that learns to align model behaviour with information sufficiency through supervised finetuning. Our approach integrates structured state representations, knowledge graph-grounded context, and a finetuned planner that explicitly models missing variables and decision reasoning. Experiments across four multi-source QA datasets show that the finetuned planner achieves 55.6% macro F1 — a 20.3 percentage point gain over the best inference-time architecture — with Abstain recall rising from 13.3% to 58.1% and hallucination rate falling from 42.7% to 33.8%, while maintaining 100% structured output compliance across 5,218 test samples. Our results highlight the limitations of inference-time interventions and emphasise the need for training-time alignment of epistemic decision-making in language models. 

Keywords: question answering, retrieval-augmented generation, epistemic calibration, knowl-edge graphs, supervised finetuning, hallucination reduction. 

Code Availability. The full codebase — including dataset construction pipelines, knowledge graph builder, finetuning dataset generator, LoRA training scripts, and the three-agent inference pipeline — is publicly available at https://github.com/MadsDoodle/PassiveQA . Questions, bug reports, and suggestions are welcome via the repository’s issue tracker. 

## 1 Introduction 

Consider a legal QA system asked: “Am I entitled to redundancy pay?” The system retrieves the correct statutory clause and responds: “Yes, employees are entitled to statutory redundancy pay after two years of continuous service” — without ever establishing that the user has been employed for fourteen months. The retrieved document is correct. The generated text is faithful to it. The system fails anyway, because it committed to an answer without first determining 1 

> arXiv:2604.04565v1 [cs.CL] 6 Apr 2026 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA

whether the information available was sufficient to ground one. This is an epistemic failure ,structurally invisible to standard retrieval and generation metrics. Large language models and retrieval-augmented generation systems share an assumption that is rarely stated and almost never challenged: every query is answerable [Lewis et al., 2020, Gao et al., 2023]. The system’s only task, in the standard framing, is to find the best answer. There is no mechanism for deciding whether an answer should be attempted at all. This assumption fails routinely in deployment — queries arrive incomplete, with implicit variables the user expects the system to ask about, or with topics absent from the knowledge base entirely. In each case, the standard RAG response is the same: retrieve the highest-scoring chunks and generate the most fluent completion [Li et al., 2025, Ji et al., 2023]. Critically, improving retrieval quality does not fix this. Better retrieval surfaces more plausible-looking evidence, which, without an epistemic decision gate, increases overconfident answering [Li et al., 2025]. We demonstrate this empirically: an enhanced RAG pipeline with semantic chunking, hybrid retrieval, cross-encoder reranking, and self-reflection achieves a hallucination rate of 51.7% — higher than the 42.7% baseline it was designed to improve. The standard mitigation is confidence calibration [Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2017, Xin et al., 2021] — assign a scalar to each response and abstain below a threshold. This framing is insufficient for two reasons. First, it collapses two qualitatively distinct epistemic states: a query unanswerable because its topic is absent from the KB (irrecoverable — honest refusal is correct) versus a query unanswerable because a critical variable is missing but recoverable through dialogue (a targeted clarification question is correct). Conflating these discards information the user needs [Aliannejadi et al., 2019, Saeidi et al., 2018]. Second, entropy-based confidence signals are insufficient for safe selective prediction in LLMs [Phillips et al., 2026], and models frequently fail to refuse even when their confidence is low [Yin et al., 2024]. We instead ground the routing decision in the information state S(q) = ( Vknown , V missing , C )and define three actions with non-overlapping epistemic semantics: (i) Answer — Vmissing = ∅ and retrieved evidence provides a complete reasoning path. (ii) Ask — Vmissing ̸ = ∅ but missing variables are recoverable : a targeted clarification resolves the gap. (iii) Abstain — Vmissing ̸ = ∅ and missing information is irrecoverable : no user clarification will help. Hallucination risk scales monotonically with the incompleteness measure I(q) = |Vmissing |/(|Vknown |+

|Vmissing |), motivating variable-state tracking as the primary routing signal. The central claim of this paper is that this epistemic calibration cannot be achieved at inference time . We establish this by exhausting the space of inference-time interventions across three progressively stronger RAG architectures. All three plateau at 34–38% decision accuracy and below 14% Abstain recall, with a consistent failure mode: the model defaults to 

Answer regardless of the information state, because that behaviour is encoded in its pretraining distribution [Ouyang et al., 2022]. No inference-time signal can override a prior this strong without modifying the parameters that encode it. To address this, we propose PassiveQA , a framework for epistemically calibrated QA through training-time alignment. PassiveQA constructs a decision-weighted knowledge graph 

G2 in which edge weights encode the three-action supervision signal — Answer -supporting paths are reinforced, Abstain -associated paths penalised, and recoverable missing variables are injected as explicit ?var placeholder nodes. A 34K-sample finetuning corpus of graph-grounded structured reasoning chains then trains a LoRA-adapted Mistral-7B-Instruct planner [Jiang et al., 2023, Hu et al., 2021] to produce explicit, structured decisions over the three-action space. 

Results. The finetuned planner achieves 55.6% macro F1 on the held-out test split — a 

20.3 pp gain over the best inference-time architecture (v3: 35.3%) and 28.9 pp over the 2Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

standard RAG baseline (26.7%). Abstain recall rises from 13.3% to 58.1% , confirming that the empty-graph signal is learnable through training in a way that inference-time thresholds cannot replicate. Per-output structural compliance is 100% across 5,218 test samples. These results hold under a severely compute-constrained regime — 2 epochs over 9,000 samples (26% of the available 34K finetuning set) — establishing a conservative lower bound. 

Positioning. PassiveQA sits at the intersection of three research threads that have largely developed independently: selective prediction [Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2017, Xin et al., 2021], conversational clarification [Saeidi et al., 2018, Aliannejadi et al., 2019], and knowledge graph-augmented reasoning [Yasunaga et al., 2021, Sun et al., 2019]. Prior work in selective prediction operates on classification models with calibrated outputs and treats abstention as a binary post-hoc decision. Prior work on clarification focuses on question generation conditioned on a fixed dialogue policy, without modelling the information state that determines whether to ask. Prior work on KG-augmented QA uses graph structure to improve answer quality, but not to route queries away from answering entirely. PassiveQA unifies these threads by treating the three-action routing decision as a first-class learning objective, grounded simultaneously in structured knowledge, explicit variable-state tracking, and training-time behavioural alignment. The decision-weighted knowledge graph G2 is the concrete artefact that makes this unification possible: it is the only component in the pipeline that jointly encodes semantic grounding, multi-hop reasoning signal, and epistemic supervision in a single structure that the planner can query at inference time. 

Contributions: 

• A formal three-action decision framework grounded in decision theory and information-state decomposition, including a joint answerability signal A(q) and multi-turn resolution rate ρt

(§3). 

• Strong empirical evidence that inference-time interventions fail to consistently instil epistemic passivity, established across three progressively stronger RAG architectures ( §5). 

• A multi-source dataset pipeline unifying four QA benchmarks with explicit variable-state supervision ( §4). 

• A three-phase KG construction procedure whose central novelty is query-guided decision reinforcement on edge weights and ?var placeholder injection for recoverable missing variables (§6). 

• A 34K-sample graph-grounded finetuning dataset and LoRA training procedure for instilling three-action routing as a learned capability ( §8). 

• A three-agent execution architecture with strict routing/generation separation, making planner and agent failures independently diagnosable ( §9). 

Paper organisation. Section 2 surveys related work across the six threads that PassiveQA draws from. Section 3 develops the formal framework, including the information-state decomposi-tion, utility-maximisation framing, and the full set of retrieval and graph scoring signals. Section 4 describes dataset construction, balancing, and variable population. Section 5 presents the three RAG architectures and their evaluation, establishing the inference-time ceiling. Section 6 de-tails the three-phase knowledge graph construction and post-processing pipeline. Section 7 describes the finetuning dataset construction and prompt schema. Section 8 covers the LoRA training procedure. Section 9 presents the three-agent execution architecture. Section 10 reports quantitative results, planner observations, and qualitative error analysis. Section 11 discusses limitations and future directions, and Section 12 concludes. 3Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Figure 1: Full PassiveQA pipeline. Left to right: the four source datasets are merged into a unified 61K-sample schema with explicit variable-state fields ( §4); a knowledge base of 105,420 chunks is constructed and indexed ( §5); three progressive RAG architectures are evaluated on the KB alone ( §5); the KB is simultaneously processed through a three-phase KG construction pipeline producing the decision-weighted graph G2 (§6); G2 and the unified dataset jointly generate the 34K KG-grounded finetuning dataset ( §7), which trains the LoRA planner ( §8); at inference the planner receives the query and KG context and routes to one of three specialised agents ( §9). The dashed feedback arrow models multi-turn state update (Eq. 20): a resolved variable from the Ask agent transitions from Vmissing to Vknown before the next planner call. 

## 2 Related Work 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation. RAG systems augment language models with non-parametric retrieval over an external knowledge base [Lewis et al., 2020, Gao et al., 2023]. Standard pipelines retrieve top-k chunks via dense passage retrieval [Karpukhin et al., 2020] or retrieval-conditioned language modelling [Guu et al., 2020]. Subsequent work explored fusion-in-decoder generation [Izacard and Grave, 2021] and retrieval from massive datastores [Borgeaud et al., 2022]. Hybrid pipelines combining BM25 [Robertson and Zaragoza, 2009] with dense encoders and late-interaction reranking [Santhanam et al., 2022] are now standard. Despite 4Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

these advances, retrieval improvements without explicit epistemic modelling tend to increase overconfident answering — a finding we corroborate empirically in §5. 

Hallucination and Faithfulness. Hallucination in LLMs is widely recognised as a critical obstacle to deployment [Ji et al., 2023, Maynez et al., 2020]. Dedicated detection pipelines with calibrated ensembles have recently been proposed for RAG settings [Goswami and Kurra, 2025], and selective abstention learning has been used as a training-time mechanism to suppress hallucination at the source [Huang et al., 2025]. Our work differs from all of the above by targeting the decision to answer at all , rather than post-hoc verification of a generated answer [Li et al., 2025]. 

Selective Prediction and Abstention. Selective prediction [Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2017] studies the coverage–accuracy trade-off. Xin et al. [Xin et al., 2021] formalise abstention for NLP via error regularisation; Varshney and Baral [Varshney and Baral, 2023] extend this to open-domain QA by revisiting abstained instances post-hoc. Recent empirical work shows that LLMs frequently do not know when to refuse [Yin et al., 2024], and that confidence entropy alone is an insufficient gating signal [Phillips et al., 2026]. We extend selective prediction to a three-way open-ended QA routing decision. 

Conversational and Clarification-seeking QA. The ShARC benchmark [Saeidi et al., 2018] introduced clarification-seeking before committing to a policy-grounded answer, directly motivating our Ask action. QuAC [Choi et al., 2018] models information-seeking dialogues with explicit unanswerable annotations. The importance of proactively asking clarifying questions was established by Aliannejadi et al. [Aliannejadi et al., 2019], and learning which questions to generate was studied by Rao and Daum´ e [Rao and Daum´ e, 2018]. Recent work on conversational machine reading formalises the decision to inquire [Zhou et al., 2023], but without a unified three-action framework or graph-grounded supervision. The original ShARC system achieved 61.4% macro accuracy using task-specific rule-following models [Saeidi et al., 2018]; PassiveQA does not target this benchmark directly, as it is designed as a general-purpose epistemic routing framework rather than a policy-compliance system, but the ShARC component of our evaluation inherits its annotation scheme and supervision signal. 

Knowledge Graphs for QA. Graph-augmented retrieval supports multi-hop reasoning by organising knowledge into structured representations [Jiang et al., 2025]. QA-GNN [Yasunaga et al., 2021] jointly reasons over language models and knowledge graphs via graph neural networks; Sun et al. [Sun et al., 2019] ground multi-hop QA directly over entity subgraphs; and KagNet [Lin et al., 2019] integrates graph networks with commonsense knowledge. Our work extends this paradigm by constructing a decision-reinforced knowledge graph whose edge weights encode the three-action supervision signal — a dimension absent from prior graph-augmented QA systems. 

Parameter-Efficient Finetuning and Alignment. LoRA [Hu et al., 2021] and QLoRA [Dettmers et al., 2023] enable efficient finetuning within single-GPU memory budgets. InstructGPT [Ouyang et al., 2022] demonstrated that RLHF can align model behaviour with human preferences, mo-tivating training-time alignment as the fundamental mechanism for behaviour change. Direct Preference Optimisation [Rafailov et al., 2023] offers a stable supervised alternative. We apply LoRA to instil three-action decision behaviour in Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 [Jiang et al., 2023], treating epistemic routing as a behaviour alignment problem rather than a prompt engineering problem. 5Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

## 3 Formal Framework 

3.1 Information State and Decision Policy 

Let q denote a user query. We define the information state of q as: 

S(q) =  Vknown , V missing , C  (1) where Vknown is the set of concrete entities or attributes explicitly present in the query and retrieved context, Vmissing is the set of variables required to resolve q but absent from S, and C

is the set of constraints and conversational context. The incompleteness measure is: 

I(q) = |Vmissing ||Vknown | + |Vmissing | (2) The planner πθ is a probabilistic policy over actions a ∈ { Answer , Ask , Abstain }:

πθ(a | S(q)) = softmax  fθ(S(q))  (3) where fθ is a neural network mapping the information state to action logits. The planner’s role is not to generate a response but to select the action that maximises expected utility given S(q). This separation between decision and generation is the architectural commitment that distinguishes PassiveQA from standard RAG systems, which conflate the two into a single generation step. 

State initialisation. At the start of each dialogue, the state is initialised from the current query and retrieved context: 

S0(q) =  ent( q) ∪ ent( D), req( q) \ ent( D), ∅ (4) where ent (·) denotes named entities extracted from a text and req (q) denotes the set of variables logically required to answer q. The constraint set C is empty at turn zero and accumulates resolved variables and dialogue history across subsequent turns. 

Action space semantics. The three actions partition the response space into non-overlapping epistemic commitments. Formally, let R be the space of all possible responses. The planner defines a routing function: 

ϕ : S(q) −→ 



Rans a = Answer 

Rclar a = Ask 

Rref a = Abstain 

(5) where Rans is the space of KB-grounded factual responses, Rclar is the space of well-formed clarification questions, and Rref is the space of specific, honest refusals. The routing function 

ϕ is implemented by the finetuned planner at inference time and by the hard gate (Eq. 21) in Architecture 3. 

Relationship between incompleteness and action. The three actions correspond to three regimes of I(q): 

a∗(q) ≈



Answer I(q) ≈ 0

Ask 0 < I (q) < 1 ∧ Vmissing is recoverable 

Abstain I(q) ≈ 1 ∨ Vmissing is irrecoverable (6) 6Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

The distinction between Ask and Abstain when Vmissing ̸ = ∅ depends on whether the missing information is recoverable — i.e. whether a user clarification could plausibly supply it. This recoverability judgement is encoded in the knowledge graph via the presence or absence of ?var 

nodes ( §6): a missing variable that can be injected as a graph placeholder is recoverable; a query whose topic has no graph nodes at all is not. 

3.2 Decision as Utility Maximisation 

Action selection is framed as expected utility maximisation: 

a∗ = arg max  

> a

EU (a | S(q))  (7) The utility function encodes the epistemic trade-offs: 

• U (Answer ): high reward for a correct, grounded response; high penalty for hallucination. 

• U (Ask ): moderate cost (extra conversational turn) but reduces |Vmissing |.

• U (Abstain ): safe floor; avoids harm but provides no useful information. 

3.3 Hallucination Risk 

We define hallucination risk as the conditional probability of generating an incorrect answer when committing to Answer :

H(q) = P incorrect answer | S(q), a = Answer  (8) We hypothesise a structural relationship between hallucination risk and information incomplete-ness: 

H(q) ∝ I(q) (9) 

Hallucination risk increases monotonically with information incompleteness. This motivates the use of I(q) as a gating signal before answer generation. This relationship is motivated by observed trends in our experiments, though we do not provide explicit statistical validation. 

3.4 Retrieval Signals 

Two complementary retrieval-derived signals are formalised. Confidence measures the best-matching chunk in the document set D:Conf( q) = max  

> d∈D

sim( q, d ) (10) 

Coverage measures lexical completeness of the query terms against the retrieved set: Coverage( q) = | terms( q) ∩ terms( D)|| terms( q)| (11) 

3.5 Ambiguity Score 

The ambiguity signal is a feature-based estimator over K heuristic signals hi(q) ∈ [0 , 1]: Amb( q) = 1

K

> K

X

> i=1

hi(q) (12) The heuristics include: query length ( ≤ 4 words), presence of dangling pronouns, vague quantifiers, absence of named entities, and comparative constructions without both comparison arguments. 7Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

3.6 Conflict Score 

When multiple retrieved chunks address the same query from contradictory directions, committing to Answer risks producing an internally inconsistent response. We define the conflict score as the mean pairwise cosine dissimilarity among the top-k retrieved chunk embeddings {e1, . . . , e k}:Conflict( q) = 1 − 2

k(k − 1) 

> k−1

X

> i=1
> k

X

> j=i+1

sim( ei, e j ) (13) A high conflict score ( Conflict (q) > τ con ) indicates that the retrieved evidence is internally inconsistent — the query may be ambiguous across document boundaries, or the KB contains contradictory entries. In either case, the appropriate response is to seek clarification rather than to synthesise a potentially misleading answer. Conflict thus serves as the highest-priority signal in the hard gating rule (Eq. 21). 

3.7 Joint Answerability Signal 

The four signals — Conf (q), Coverage (q), Amb (q), and Conflict (q) — are each necessary but not individually sufficient for routing. We define a scalar joint answerability signal A(q) ∈ [0 , 1] that summarises evidential support: 

A(q) = Conf( q) · Coverage( q) ·  1 − Amb( q) ·  1 − Conflict( q) (14) Each factor lies in [0 , 1], so A(q) = 1 only when retrieval confidence is maximal, query terms are fully covered, the query is unambiguous, and retrieved chunks are mutually consistent — the ideal conditions for Answer . When any factor approaches zero, A(q) collapses regardless of the others, encoding the intuition that a single failure mode is sufficient to warrant caution. The hard gate (Eq. 21) can equivalently be read as a threshold rule on Eq. 14 with per-factor thresholds that allow individual signals to override the product when their deviation is extreme. 

3.8 Variable Resolution and Information Gain 

In multi-turn settings, the Ask action is only valuable if it reduces incompleteness. We define the resolution rate at turn t as: 

ρt = |Vknown ,t ||Vknown ,t | + |Vmissing ,t | = 1 − It(q) (15) A successful Ask at turn t transitions one or more variables from Vmissing ,t to Vknown ,t +1 per Eq. 20, strictly increasing ρt+1 > ρ t. The expected information gain of issuing a clarification question c is: IG( c | St) = E[ρt+1 − ρt | St, a t = Ask , c ] (16) A well-formed clarification question maximises IG by targeting the specific missing variable that is both (a) necessary to resolve the query and (b) most likely to be known to the user. The anchor-based question builder ( §7) implements a heuristic approximation of this objective: it selects the missing variable with the highest SBERT similarity to the known variable set, targeting the gap most proximate to information the user has already provided. 

3.9 Knowledge Graph Scoring 

Each edge e in the knowledge graph receives a final weight combining semantic grounding (Phase 2) and query-action reinforcement (Phase 3): 

we = α · sem( e) + (1 − α) · act( e) (17) 8Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

where sem (e) is the semantic similarity score between the triple and its source passage, and act (e) is the accumulated action reinforcement signal. With α = 0 .5, both components receive equal weight. The path score over a graph path p in the set of all paths P(q) is: PathScore( q) = max 

> p∈P (q)

Y

> e∈p

we (18) Strong paths ( PathScore ≈ 1) support Answer ; broken paths support Ask ; absent paths support Abstain .

3.10 Training Objective 

The finetuning loss decomposes into a decision classification component and a generation component: 

L = Ldecision + λ Lgeneration (19) where Ldecision = − P 

> (q,a,y )

log Pθ(a | S(q)) is the cross-entropy loss over action labels and 

Lgeneration is the standard causal language modelling loss over the structured reasoning chain. 

3.11 Multi-turn State Update 

For multi-turn dialogues, the information state is updated after each turn: 

St+1 = St ∪ resolve( qt, a t) (20) where resolve transfers variables from Vmissing to Vknown when the user’s response satisfies a clarification request. 

3.12 Decision Boundary 

The hard gating rule in Architecture 3 implements the following decision boundary: 

a =



Answer if Conf( q) > τ c ∧ I(q) ≈ 0

Ask if I(q) > τ i ∨ Amb( q) > τ a

Abstain otherwise (21) where τc, τi, τa are tunable thresholds. 

3.13 Relationship Between Formal Signals and Implementation 

The equations in this section range from directly implemented to approximately realised. Table 1 summarises the mapping. Equations A(q), PathScore (q), and IG (c | St) are best understood as conceptual abstractions of the decision process, with current implementations relying on heuristic approximations. Grounding these signals in learnable parameters — for instance, learning α in Eq. 17 end-to-end, or training a dedicated path scorer — is deferred to future work. 

## 4 Dataset Construction 

4.1 Dataset Selection 

Four publicly available datasets were selected to provide complementary coverage of the three target actions across diverse reasoning contexts. 9Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Table 1: Mapping from formal signals to implementation components. 

Equation Status Implementation 

I(q) (Eq. 2) Direct Variable population via GPT-4o-mini ( §4); threshold τi in hard gate (Eq. 21) Conf( q) (Eq. 10) Direct Max sigmoid cross-encoder logit, Architecture 3 Coverage( q) (Eq. 11) Direct Non-stopword term overlap, Ar-chitecture 3 Amb( q) (Eq. 12) Direct Five heuristic signals, Architec-ture 3 Conflict( q) (Eq. 13) Direct Pairwise chunk dissimilarity, Ar-chitecture 3 

A(q) (Eq. 14) Approximated The hard gate uses per-signal thresholds rather than the prod-uct form; A(q) provides the theo-retical motivation for why all four signals are jointly necessary PathScore( q) (Eq. 18) Approximated Edge weights are used to rank triples during KG context re-trieval ( §7); explicit path enumer-ation is not computed at inference time IG( c | St) (Eq. 16) Heuristic The anchor-based question builder ( §7) maximises SBERT similarity between missing vari-able and known variable set as a proxy; no empirical validation is conducted 

L (Eq. 19) Direct Causal LM loss over assistant turn tokens, λ = 1 

ShARC [Saeidi et al., 2018]. A multi-turn dialogue dataset grounded in government policy documents. Each sample contains a regulatory snippet, an optional user scenario, a question, and a gold label. The label space maps directly onto the three actions: Yes/No responses map to Answer (13,830 samples); Follow-on responses — where the system must request additional information — map to Ask ; and Irrelevant labels map to Abstain (1,256 samples). ShARC provides explicit evidence chains (clarification questions) that serve as primary supervision for the Ask action. Approximately 81.6% of samples include a user scenario, and dialogue history depth ranges from 0 to 6 prior turns. 

QuAC [Choi et al., 2018]. A large-scale conversational reading comprehension dataset built on Wikipedia passages, comprising 83,568 training QA pairs across 11,567 dialogues (avg. 7.2 turns). CANNOTANSWER responses (17.3% of training samples) are mapped to Abstain ; turns marked followup=y are mapped to Ask ; all remaining answered turns map to Answer . QuAC is the primary source of multi-turn Answer supervision. 

HotpotQA [Yang et al., 2018]. A multi-hop QA dataset with 90,447 training samples requiring reasoning over two or more Wikipedia passages. All samples have gold answers; the 10 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

entire split maps to Answer . The dataset contributes two reasoning types: bridge questions (72,991 samples) requiring chained inference across documents, and comparison questions (17,456 samples) requiring attribute comparison. 

ContractNLI [Koreeda and Manning, 2021]. Legal contract review framed as natural language inference over 423 NDA documents, with 7,191 clause-level annotations across 17 NDA clause types. Entailment and Contradiction labels both map to Answer (60.8%); NotMentioned maps to Abstain (39.2%). This dataset provides a controlled Abstain source where abstention arises from genuine absence of relevant information rather than query-context mismatch. 

4.2 Unified Schema 

All four datasets are converted into a single JSON schema with fields for query , context documents ,

action label , response , a structured state object ( known variables , missing variables ,

failure mode , completeness ), and metadata (source, multi-turn flag, turn ID, difficulty). The ShARC evidence chain directly populates missing variables , providing explicit Ask 

supervision. The final merged training set comprises 203,096 samples with the distribution: 

Answer 65.1%, Ask 22.4%, Abstain 12.5%. 

4.3 Dataset Balancing 

The raw merged dataset is heavily skewed toward Answer (65.1%), which would bias the planner toward reflexive answering — precisely the behaviour this work aims to counteract. A balanced 61K subset was constructed with the target distribution: Answer 33% · Ask 37% ·

Abstain 30%. Dialogues were treated as atomic units during sampling to preserve conversational coherence. Turn depth was capped per dialogue length. Of 12,195 unique dialogues, 609 were capped; all resulting sequences were verified for continuity with zero broken chains. Source minimums were enforced: ContractNLI (7K — all available), HotpotQA (14K), ShARC (14K), QuAC ( ∼26K). The achieved action distribution after trimming settled at 

Answer 49.9% / Ask 28.9% / Abstain 21.2%, shifted substantially toward passive actions. The hard Answer floor from HotpotQA (which contributes no Ask /Abstain signal) prevented reaching the original targets exactly. 

4.4 Variable Population via GPT-4o-mini 

The unified schema includes known variables and missing variables fields. For ShARC, missing variables were directly available from the evidence chain. For all other sources, these fields were populated via GPT-4o-mini under controlled prompting. While this introduces potential annotation noise, the variables serve as weak supervision signals, and the model primarily learns aggregate decision patterns rather than relying on exact variable identity. The extraction prompt instructed the model to identify: (a) known variables — concrete entities or attributes explicitly present in the query (max 5); and (b) missing variables — information required to resolve the query but absent, with the hard constraint that Answer -action samples always receive an empty missing variables list. Extraction was parallelised in batches of 50 with 5 concurrent workers and checkpoint-based crash recovery. The resulting variable fields serve dual purposes: inputs to the knowledge graph builder (known variables anchor graph traversal) and the core supervision signal for the planner’s finetuning dataset. Table 2 summarises the final dataset composition. The contrast in context length between ShARC (45.5 words — compact policy snippets) and ContractNLI (1,674 words — full NDA documents) motivates the source-aware chunking strategy 11 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Table 2: Final merged dataset composition across sources and action labels. 

Source Total Answer Ask Abstain 

ShARC 14,000 – Primary 1,256 QuAC 26,000 Primary Followup CANNOTANSWER 

HotpotQA 14,000 All – –ContractNLI 7,000 60.8% – 39.2% 

Merged 61K 49.9% 28.9% 21.2% Table 3: Dataset characteristics across the four sources. 

Property ShARC QuAC HotpotQA ContractNLI 

Avg. question length (words) 7.5 6.5 17.8 18.2 Avg. context length (words) 45.5 400+ varies 1,674 Multi-turn Yes (up to 6) Yes (avg 7.2) No No 

Ask signal source Evidence chain followup=y None None 

Abstain signal source Irrelevant label CANNOTANSWER None NotMentioned Reasoning type Policy Wikipedia Multi-hop NLI Avg. turns per dialogue 2.3 7.2 1.0 1.0 % queries with named entities 61.2 74.8 92.1 88.4 described in §5: uniform chunking would either fragment ShARC snippets below minimum coherence or leave ContractNLI documents unchunked and oversized for retrieval. 

## 5 RAG Architectures 

We evaluate three progressively more sophisticated RAG architectures on a balanced 900-sample held-out set (300 per action) before introducing the graph-grounded planner. 

5.1 Architecture 1 — Baseline RAG 

The baseline follows a standard retrieve-then-generate design. Context documents are dedupli-cated by MD5 hash and indexed with source-aware chunking: ContractNLI documents (dense legal text, typically 1,600+ words) are chunked when exceeding 300 words; QuAC passages when exceeding 400 words; ShARC and HotpotQA are kept whole. A fixed word-window strategy with 50-word overlap is used. All chunks are encoded with all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (384-dim) and indexed in a FAISS flat inner-product index over L2-normalised vectors for exact cosine similarity search. At inference, the top-k chunks are retrieved, concatenated with the query and conversation history, and passed to Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 (4-bit quantised, NF4) with a system prompt enforcing the three-action output format. Decoding is greedy (temperature=1.0, do sample=False). 

Results. Decision accuracy: 34%; hallucination rate: 42.7%; macro F1: 26.7%. Per-action ac-curacy reveals severe skew: Answer predicted correctly 81% of the time; Ask accuracy collapses to 12%; Abstain to 9%. The confusion matrix shows the model defaulting overwhelmingly to 

Answer : 80 of 100 Abstain cases and 75 of 100 Ask cases are incorrectly classified as Answer .This provides strong support for the central thesis: a standard RAG system with no epistemic passivity training is effectively incapable of distinguishing when to ask or abstain, reducing to a near-unconditional answering system. 12 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

5.2 Architecture 2 — Enhanced RAG 

The enhanced pipeline introduces five targeted modifications addressing specific failure modes identified in the baseline. 

Multi-Granularity Knowledge Base. The KB is indexed at two granularities: coarse (full semantic chunks via sentence-boundary-aware chunking) and fine (individual sentences). Both are embedded in a single FAISS index. 

Hybrid Retrieval. A BM25 sparse index is added alongside the dense index. At query time, scores from both are normalised to [0 , 1] and fused as a weighted sum with α = 0 .5, addressing vocabulary mismatch for domain-specific regulatory and legal text. 

Query Understanding. Two pre-retrieval transformations are applied: (i) query rewriting via Mistral to produce retrieval-friendly formulations of elliptical multi-turn queries; and (ii) multi-hop detection that decomposes queries likely requiring multi-document evidence into 2–3 independent sub-queries. 

Cross-Encoder Reranking and Context Compression. The top-20 hybrid results are reranked using cross-encoder/ms-marco-MiniLM-L-6-v2 . The top-5 chunks are then com-pressed to retain only query-relevant sentences via keyword overlap scoring. 

Self-Reflection. A second prompt asks the model to verify its action decision. Reflection changed the initial decision in 12.7% of cases . 

Results. Despite these five enhancements, overall decision accuracy remains at 34% with macro F1 of 26.7% — statistically identical to the baseline. Per-action accuracy is likewise unchanged: 

Answer 81%, Ask 12%, Abstain 9%. The confusion structure is preserved verbatim from the baseline. Hallucination rate rose to 51.7%, demonstrating that better retrieval without a decision gate can increase overconfident answering by surfacing more plausible-looking but insufficient evidence. This consistent negative result highlights a key limitation of the RAG section: the Answer -skew failure mode is unlikely to be solely a retrieval quality problem, and not easily addressed through inference-time modifications alone. The root cause lies in the model’s underlying generation priors — the LLM has no finetuned disposition toward epistemic passivity. 

5.3 Architecture 3 — Decision-Aware RAG (v3) 

Architecture 3 abandons the single-prompt generate-and-decide paradigm. Instead, a dedicated pre-generation pipeline of explicit, interpretable signals gates the LLM before any response is generated. 

Evidence Scoring. Three signals are computed directly from retrieved chunks before any generation call. Confidence uses the maximum sigmoid-normalised cross-encoder logit score. 

Coverage measures the fraction of non-stopword query terms appearing across the retrieved chunk set. Ambiguity is computed via Equation (12) over five heuristic signals. Conflict measures pairwise cosine dissimilarity among the top-4 chunk embeddings. 

Answerability Classifier. A dedicated lightweight LLM call is issued before answer genera-tion, asking only whether the context is sufficient. The classifier outputs one of three labels: 

ANSWERABLE , NEEDS CLARIFICATION , or NOT ANSWERABLE , decoupling epistemic judgement from fluent answer generation. 13 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Hard Gating. The hard gate combines all signals with explicit priority ordering: 1. Conflict > 0.70 ⇒ Ask 

2. Conf( q) < 0.35 ∧ Coverage( q) < 0.30 ⇒ Abstain 

3. Amb( q) > 0.45 ⇒ Ask 

4. Classifier = NOT ANSWERABLE ⇒ Abstain 

5. Classifier = NEEDS CLARIFICATION ⇒ Ask 

6. None of the above ⇒ Answer 

These thresholds are tunable without retraining, making this the only component where passive-action bias is directly controllable. 

Action-Specific Generation. Three separate task-specific prompts handle the three actions. The Ask prompt receives the gate reason as explicit input and enforces a single well-formed clarification question. The Abstain prompt generates a specific statement about missing information rather than a generic refusal. 

Results. Architecture 3 is the only pipeline achieving measurable improvement: decision accuracy 38%, macro F1 35.3% (+8.6 pp), hallucination rate 33.8% ( −9 pp), and Ask recall 40% (vs. 2% baseline). However, Abstain recall remains low at 13.3%, and all architectures expose the ceiling of inference-time interventions, motivating the finetuning approach. 

5.4 Quantitative Comparison 

Table 4: Quantitative comparison of three RAG architectures on the 900-sample evaluation set. 

Metric Baseline Enhanced v3 

Decision Accuracy 34.0% 34.0% 38.0% Macro F1 26.7% 26.7% 35.3% Hallucination Rate 42.7% 51.7% 33.8% 

Ask Recall 2.0% 12.0% 40.0% 

Abstain Recall 26.0% 9.0% 13.3% Coverage 67.3% 78.7% 54.0% 

## 6 Knowledge Graph Construction 

The knowledge graph is built through a three-phase pipeline that transforms flat KB chunks into a structured, decision-weighted graph. The key novelty is that the graph is not a passive factual store — it is actively shaped by the three-action supervision signal, so edge weights encode both semantic coherence and epistemic utility. 

6.1 Phase 1 — Entity and Relation Extraction ( G0)

All 105,420 KB chunks are parsed using spaCy ( en core web sm ). Two design constraints distinguish this extraction from standard open information extraction. 

Named-entity-only nodes. Only spaCy NER entities are admitted as graph nodes; noun chunks are excluded to avoid high-degree hub nodes from generic phrases. Entities are normalised, 14 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA Query q Hybrid Retrieval Evidence Scoring 

> Hard Gate
> Answer
> Agent
> Ask
> Agent
> Abstain
> Agent
> Answer
> Ask
> Abstain
> Finetuned Planner (Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 + LoRA)
> signals
> decision

Figure 2: Overview of the PassiveQA pipeline. After hybrid retrieval and evidence scoring, either the hard gate (Architecture 3) or the finetuned planner routes the query to one of three specialised agents. Dashed arrows indicate the planner path used in the full three-agent architecture. filtered through a hard validator (rejecting pronouns, stopwords, pure numerics, strings under 3 characters), and mapped to seven semantic categories: Person, Organisation, Location, Attribute, Work, Concept, Event. 

Entity-constrained triples. Relations are extracted via syntactic dependency parsing. A triple is admitted only if both subject and object map to named entities in the entity set, eliminating pronoun-based spurious hub nodes. Weak verbs (copulae, auxiliaries) are filtered except in HotpotQA, where relational verbs carry genuine multi-hop signal. Initial confidence scores: 0 .8for direct SVO triples, 0 .7 for prepositional-object chains. 

G0 after Phase 1: 27,189 nodes, 24,491 edges. Isolated nodes are immediately pruned. 

6.2 Phase 2 — Semantic Validation ( G1)

Each triple is converted to a natural-language sentence via a template. Both KB chunk texts and triple sentences are encoded with all-MiniLM-L6-v2 . For each edge, the cosine similarity between the triple sentence embedding and its source chunk embeddings measures semantic grounding. A frequency bonus log (1 + freq ) × 0.03 rewards cross-document corroboration. Edges below τ = 0 .50 are removed. 

G1 after Phase 2: 15,468 nodes, 11,965 edges — 12,526 noisy edges removed (51.1% of G0

edges). Average edge weight rises slightly from 0.726 to 0.728, confirming that removed edges were low-confidence extractions. 

6.3 Phase 3 — Query-Guided Decision Reinforcement ( G2)

Phase 3 is the central novel contribution of the KG module. For each of the 273,809 (query, KB, action) triples in the dataset, the associated graph edges are updated according to the gold action label: 

• Answer : edge weight +0 .20 (context was sufficient to answer). 

• Ask : edge weight +0 .05 (context partially relevant but insufficient). 

• Abstain : edge weight −0.10 (context despite surface relevance did not support answering). For HotpotQA entries, the shortest path between pairs of KB-linked nodes is found and each edge along that path is reinforced, propagating multi-hop signal through the graph. 

Variable node injection. For every Ask -action sample, query entities absent from the graph are added as special ?var nodes connected to the nearest graph entity via a requires relation 15 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

with weight 0.9. These nodes serve as structural placeholders representing missing information. A total of 4,295 variable nodes were injected (21.7% of total nodes). To illustrate the injection mechanism concretely: ?var quac 000014 , anchored to the United States , encodes the missing entity in the query “What do we know about Cove Reber?” ; while 

?var quac 000051 , anchored to the Air Force , encodes the unresolved gap in “Where was Bernie born?” — each representing the precise information the Ask agent should surface to the user. The final edge weight combines both signals per Equation (17). 

G2 after Phase 3: 19,763 nodes (4,295 variable), 17,715 edges. Average edge weight rises to 0.819, reflecting reinforcement of frequently traversed Answer paths. 

6.4 Graph Statistics 

Table 5 summarises the knowledge graph at each construction phase. Table 5: Knowledge graph statistics across construction phases. 

Phase Nodes Edges Avg. Weight Notes 

G0 27,189 24,491 0.726 Raw extraction 

G1 15,468 11,965 0.728 Semantic validation 

G2 19,763 17,715 0.819 Incl. 4,295 variable nodes The entity distribution across the 15,468 real nodes: Person (31.2%), Organisation (26.8%), Attribute (18.1%), Location (11.9%), Work (7.7%), Concept (2.4%), Event (1.9%). The graph is deliberately sparse: average real node degree 1.55, organised into 3,907 weakly connected components, the largest spanning 5,834 nodes. Edge weight distribution shows 47.1% of edges in the top bucket (0.8–1.0), a direct consequence of Phase 3 reinforcement concentrating weight on Answer -supporting paths. Top relation types are semantically rich and source-appropriate: legal relations from ContractNLI ( disclose to , transfer from ), biographical relations from QuAC ( bear in , refer as ), and event relations from HotpotQA ( defeat , win , release on ). 

6.5 Graph Post-Processing 

Following Phase 3, the graph undergoes a structured post-processing pass that repairs three categories of quality issues without rerunning any construction phase. 

Noise node removal. Despite the hard validator in Phase 1, a residual population of low-quality nodes survives into G2: (i) mixed alphanumeric strings that passed the length filter (e.g. the 1980s ); (ii) short non-entity tokens marginally exceeding the three-character threshold; (iii) generic hub nodes with degree exceeding three times the graph mean whose text spaCy does not recognise as any named entity type; and (iv) definite descriptions beginning with “the” that carry no NER label. Detection is performed by batch re-running spaCy NER over normalised node name strings rather than source passages, providing a second-pass entity check independent of extraction context. Noise nodes are removed with all incident edges. 

Variable node re-anchoring. Following noise removal, a fraction of ?var anchors are invalidated because their anchor node was itself classified as noise. For each invalidated variable node, the originating query is encoded with SBERT and matched against all surviving real nodes; the variable is re-anchored to the highest-similarity node above threshold 0.30. This threshold is intentionally permissive — any plausible entity connection is preferable to a dangling variable node. Variable nodes whose best candidate falls below 0.30 are removed entirely. In the G2

post-processing run: 609 bad anchors detected; 331 successfully re-anchored; 278 removed as unresolvable. 16 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Isolated node pruning and weight recomputation. Degree-0 nodes remaining after the above steps are removed. Every surviving edge weight is recomputed as: 

we = min  0.95 , 0.5 · sem( e) + 0 .5 · act( e) (22) The cap at 0.95 prevents any single edge from dominating path scoring. The kb to nodes and 

node to kbs indices are recomputed over the surviving node set. The post-processed graph retains 15,468 real entity nodes and 11,965 edges, with every variable node guaranteed to be anchored to a spaCy-verified named entity. 

## 7 Planner Finetuning Dataset 

7.1 KG-Grounded Context Extraction 

For each of the 61K balanced samples, graph context is retrieved via two parallel search paths. The query is encoded with SBERT and matched against all KG node embeddings (cosine similarity threshold 0.55, top-5 nodes). Each known variable is similarly matched (top-2 per variable). The union of matched nodes forms a seed set from which a 2-hop ego graph is extracted. The top-12 triples by final weight are retained, subject to a secondary relevance check (threshold 0.35) between the triple sentence and the query. For Ask -action samples, ?var * nodes adjacent to any seed node are additionally included, appearing as entity | requires | ?unknown N triples. These edges are the graph’s explicit encoding of missing information. Answer -action samples have all requires /?unknown triples filtered out. For multi-turn dialogues, variable states accumulate across the conversation history: known variables from all prior turns are merged; Ask -action turns propagate resolved variables into the resolved set, preventing repeated clarification requests. 

7.2 Prompt Schema 

Each training sample is a three-message conversation in standard chat format: 

• System prompt : defines decision rules (complete graph path ⇒ Answer; missing linking variables ⇒ Ask; no relevant nodes ⇒ Abstain). 

• User turn : structured XML tags carrying <conversation history> , <resolved variables> ,

<remaining unknowns> , <query> , <known variables> , <graph context> , <missing variables> .

• Assistant turn : four-step structured reasoning chain followed by <decision> , <justification> ,and (for Ask ) <clarification question> tags. The four reasoning steps are deterministically template-filled from real graph evidence and variable states — not LLM-generated — ensuring supervision is always grounded in actual graph content. 

7.3 Quality Filtering 

Six quality checks gate each sample before admission. Answer samples are rejected if the graph context is empty or no graph triple contains a known entity. Ask samples are rejected if they have no effective missing variable and no requires edges. A semantic specificity filter rejects missing variable strings above cosine similarity 0.45 to a set of generic anchor phrases. Of 60,995 input samples, 34,831 survive (57.1% yield). The 26,164 rejected samples fall into three categories: answer empty graph (14,386 samples — Answer cases where the KB produced no graph context at all), ask no missing no var nodes (several thousand Ask 

17 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Figure 3: Three-phase construction of the PassiveQA knowledge graph. Phase 1 (G0): dependency parsing extracts SVO triples, including low-confidence edges (e.g., pronoun-linked relations). Phase 2 (G1): semantic filtering using SBERT cosine similarity removes edges below a threshold ( τ = 0 .50), pruning noisy connections. Phase 3 (G2): graph refinement via action-based reinforcement, where Answer signals strengthen edges and 

Abstain signals penalize them; additionally, variable nodes are introduced via requires 

relations to capture missing information. samples with no usable missing variable or requires edge — incoherent supervision), and 

answer graph irrelevant (graph context was present but entirely unrelated to the query). Table 6 shows the final finetuning dataset statistics. The action distribution (Answer 23%, Ask 39%, Abstain 37%) is heavily passive-skewed relative to the raw merged dataset, which is the central design goal. Splits are performed at the dialogue level with zero dialogue-level contamination confirmed across all splits. 18 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Table 6: Planner finetuning dataset statistics across splits. 

Property Train Val Test 

Total samples 24,456 5,157 5,218 

Answer 5,663 (23.2%) 1,213 (23.5%) 1,265 (24.2%) 

Ask 9,726 (39.8%) 1,987 (38.5%) 2,025 (38.8%) 

Abstain 9,067 (37.1%) 1,957 (37.9%) 1,928 (36.9%) Multi-turn 59.4% 58.9% 58.5% Avg. KG triples 2.31 2.35 2.33 Avg. matched nodes 4.46 4.48 4.42 Zero-triple samples 41.7% 41.4% 39.3% Avg. known vars 3.39 3.45 3.25 Avg. missing vars 0.80 0.81 0.80 Avg. user turn (words) 108 109 106 Avg. assistant turn (words) 138 138 139 

## 8 Planner Finetuning 

8.1 Model and LoRA Configuration 

The planner is initialised from mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 (7.24B parameters) [Jiang et al., 2023], loaded in bfloat16 on a single GPU. Full parameter finetuning is computation-ally prohibitive; Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [Hu et al., 2021] is applied with rank r = 32, 

α = 64 (effective scale α/r = 2 .0), dropout 0.05. LoRA is applied to all seven projection ma-trices: q proj, k proj, v proj, o proj, gate proj, up proj, down proj . Including the MLP projections is important because the decision task requires routing based on structured reasoning over graph content, a capability residing in the feedforward layers as much as the attention layers. Trainable parameters: ∼83M (1.15% of total). The rank r = 32 is larger than typical LoRA setups ( r = 8 or 16), justified by task complexity: the model must parse XML-tagged structured input, reason over graph triples in a four-step format, output structured XML tags in correct order, and generate focused clarification questions. The model is loaded in 4-bit NF4 quantisation following QLoRA [Dettmers et al., 2023] to fit within single-GPU VRAM constraints. 

8.2 Training Procedure 

Training data is subsampled at the dialogue level to 9,000 training and 1,200 validation samples targeting Answer 30% / Ask 38% / Abstain 32%. The Mistral chat template is applied: 

<s>[INST] {system prompt } { user turn } [/INST] {assistant turn }</s> 

Loss is computed only on {assistant turn }</s> tokens — the system prompt and user turn are masked, so the model learns purely from the structured reasoning chain and decision tags. Table 7 details the training hyperparameters. Gradient checkpointing is enabled to reduce VRAM usage. The adapter is saved to persistent storage after each epoch. The training objective instantiates Equation (19) with λ = 1, treating decision classification and reasoning generation as equal components of the causal LM loss. 19 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Table 7: Planner finetuning hyperparameters. 

Hyperparameter Value 

Base model Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 LoRA rank ( r) 32 LoRA alpha ( α) 64 LoRA dropout 0.05 Trainable parameters ∼83M (1.15%) Sequence length 512 tokens Precision bfloat16 Epochs 2Per-device batch size 4Gradient accumulation steps 8Effective batch size 32 Learning rate 2 × 10 −4

LR scheduler Cosine decay Warmup ratio 5% Optimiser AdamW Max gradient norm 1.0 Weight decay 0.01 Best model criterion Minimum eval loss 

## 9 Three-Agent Architecture 

# Knowledge Graph G2

# Planner 

# (Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 + LoRA) 

> Query + KG context

# Answer Agent 

> (Enhanced RAG)

# Ask Agent 

> (Clarification)

# Abstain Agent 

> (Honest Refusal)
> triples
> <decision>Answer
> <decision>Ask
> <decision>Abstain

Figure 4: Three-agent architecture. The finetuned planner parses the <decision> tag and delegates execution to one of three specialised agents. The Ask agent reuses the 

<clarification question> tag directly. The trained planner serves as the routing controller for a three-agent system with a strict separation of concerns: the planner is responsible solely for the decision, and the agents are responsible solely for execution. This design makes failure modes transparent — a routing error is a planner failure; a poor output given correct routing is an agent failure. 20 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Answer Agent. Invoked on <decision>ANSWER</decision> . Operates using the enhanced RAG retrieval pipeline (hybrid BM25 + dense retrieval, cross-encoder reranking, context compression) followed by a context-grounded generation prompt. The decision burden is deliberately removed from the generation step, reducing hallucination pressure. 

Ask Agent. Invoked on <decision>ASK</decision> . The planner’s <clarification question> 

tag already contains the specific question, constructed during finetuning dataset generation via the anchor-based question builder: missing variable strings are matched against known variables via SBERT similarity (threshold 0.20) to find anchor entities, and the final question follows the template “Regarding [anchor]: could you specify [missing]?” . The Ask Agent’s role is primarily structural: packaging the question into the conversational response format and appending it to history with the Ask action label. In subsequent turns, the user’s response is assumed to resolve the missing variable, transitioning it from Vmissing to Vknown per Equation (20). 

Abstain Agent. Invoked on <decision>ABSTAIN</decision> . Generates a specific, honest statement explaining why the query cannot be answered, distinguishing between two causes: (a) the query topic is entirely absent from the KB, and (b) the topic is present but the required specific information is not recoverable through clarification. This distinction communicates meaningfully to the user and avoids generic refusals. 

## 10 Results and Discussion 

10.1 Key Observations Observation 1 — Retrieval quality improvements alone cannot instil epistemic passivity. The Enhanced RAG introduced five non-trivial improvements yet produced identical overall accuracy (34.0%) and identical macro F1 (26.7%) to the baseline. The enhanced pipeline’s hallucination rate was higher than baseline (51.7% vs. 42.7%), demonstrating that better retrieval without a decision gate increases overconfident answering. 

Observation 2 — Hard gating produces the only measurable improvement across all three inference-time architectures. Architecture 3 is the only pipeline improving on any metric relative to baseline: accuracy +4 pp, macro F1 +8.6 pp (26.7% → 35.3%), hallucination rate −9 pp, and Ask recall +38 pp (2% → 40%). The macro F1 gain reflects a genuine redistribution of predictions toward Ask rather than a marginal shift in the dominant class. 

Observation 3 — Ask is the most recoverable action without finetuning. Archi-tecture 3 achieves 40% Ask recall vs. 2% baseline and 12% enhanced, demonstrating that ambiguity heuristics and the answerability classifier together capture a meaningful fraction of clarification-needing cases at query level alone. 

Observation 4 — Abstain remains the hardest action. Abstain recall peaks at 26% in baseline and falls to 9% and 13.3% in enhanced and v3 respectively. The v3 confusion matrix shows 87 of 150 Abstain cases misclassified as Answer — the highest single misclassification cell. Recognising the absence of relevant information is structurally harder to gate on than detecting ambiguity or conflict. Low confidence and coverage scores are necessary but not sufficient signals for true irrelevance. 

Observation 5 — Coverage and accuracy trade off by design. Baseline coverage 67.3%, enhanced 78.7%, v3 54.0%. The hard gate’s conservative thresholds route more queries to 

Ask /Abstain , reducing the fraction of queries the system attempts to answer. For the epistemic 21 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

passivity objective, a system that correctly refuses 46% of queries while answering the rest accurately is preferable to one that attempts everything but hallucinates half of it. 

Observation 6 — All three architectures expose the ceiling of inference-time in-terventions. Even v3 achieves only 38% accuracy and 13.3% Abstain recall, establishing a clear upper bound on what can be achieved without model-level adaptation. This motivates the knowledge graph and planner finetuning approach as the necessary next step: the decision behaviour must be internalised during training, not imposed post-hoc at inference. 

10.2 Planner Observations Observation 7 — The planner surpasses all RAG baselines on macro F1 even under compute-constrained training. The finetuned planner achieves 55.6% macro F1 on the held-out test split, compared to 35.3% for the best inference-time architecture (v3). This 20.3 pp gain confirms the central thesis: decision behaviour must be internalised at training time. Notably, this result holds despite the planner being trained on only 9,000 samples (26% of the available 34K finetuning set) for 2 epochs — establishing a conservative lower bound rather than a ceiling. 

Observation 8 — Answer is the most reliably learned action; Ask remains the hardest. Per-action F1: Answer 71.2%, Abstain 63.4%, Ask 32.6%. The Ask deficit is partially explained by sequence length truncation: ASK-action samples have the longest user turns (multi-turn history plus remaining unknowns), and the 512-token budget disproportionately truncates the conversation context that distinguishes a clarification-needing query from one that should be answered directly. The Abstain result is the most surprising: recall rises substantially from 13.3% (v3) to 58.1%, confirming that the graph’s empty-node signal is learnable through training in a way that inference-time thresholds cannot replicate. 

Observation 9 — The single-turn vs. multi-turn performance gap directly impli-cates the 512-token sequence budget. Single-turn accuracy: 78.4%. Multi-turn accuracy: 25.6%. This 52.8 pp gap is the largest structural finding of the finetuning analysis. Multi-turn samples require the planner to parse <conversation history> , <resolved variables> , and 

<remaining unknowns> blocks in addition to the base query and graph context — in many cases exceeding the 512-token limit, causing the history to be silently truncated by the tokeniser. The planner then operates on a contextually amputated prompt, lacking the referents needed to resolve elliptical queries. Extending the sequence length to 1,024 or 2,048 tokens is the single highest-priority hyperparameter change for the full training run. 

Observation 10 — Zero unparseable outputs confirms that structured format is acquired independently of decision quality. Every planner output across the full evaluation set (5,218 samples) contained well-formed <reasoning> , <decision> , and <justification> 

tags in the correct order. The Ask -action <clarification question> tag was present and non-empty in 100% of ASK-routed outputs. This confirms that structured XML output format is a rapidly learnable surface pattern, separable from the harder semantic problem of choosing the correct action — an encouraging result for practical deployment, as malformed outputs are a common failure mode in structured generation. 

10.3 Finetuning Analysis 

The finetuning run is constrained by compute: 2 epochs on a 9K subsample of the full 34K dataset. The INSUFFICIENT VARIABLES failure mode accounts for 76.6% of training samples; 23.4% carry the COMPLETE mode. The 41.3% zero-triple rate means a large fraction 22 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

of samples rely on node-presence/absence signal alone; the planner may generalise differently across sparse versus rich graph contexts. Results should be treated as a proof of concept — the full training run is the natural next step. 

10.4 Qualitative Error Analysis 

To ground quantitative results in concrete model behaviour, we examine six representative predictions — two per action class, one correct and one incorrect — selected to illustrate the dominant failure modes in the confusion matrix. 

Answer cases 

✓ Answer — Correct HotpotQA · single-turn 

Query: “Which band released the album Silent Alarm in February 2005?”         

> bloc party |release |silent alarm silent alarm |release in |february 2005

The planner identifies a complete two-node path from the known entity ( Silent Alarm ) to the answer entity ( Bloc Party ) via a high-weight release relation and correctly routes to 

Answer . This represents the ideal operating condition: a short factual query, a known entity anchoring retrieval, and a direct high-confidence edge in the graph. 

× Answer → Ask (misclassified) ContractNLI · single-turn 

Query: “Does the contract allow the receiving party to share confidential information with employees?”         

> receiving party |disclose to |representatives receiving party |requires |?unknown 1

Ground truth: Answer (Entailment). The planner fixates on the requires | ?unknown 1 

variable node, interpreting its presence as a signal that clarification is needed. This is a graph context contamination failure: the ?var node was injected during Phase 3 from a different training sample sharing the same KB chunk. Because receiving party is a high-degree hub in ContractNLI, its variable node adjacency reflects the aggregate of all co-located training samples rather than the current query. The fix is a query-conditioned triple filter that suppresses requires edges whose anchor entity similarity to the current query falls below a threshold. 

Ask cases 

✓ Ask — Correct ShARC · single-turn 

Query: “Am I eligible for the pension plan?”             

> pension plan |require |employment type pension plan |require |years of service pension plan |requires |?unknown 1

Missing variables: [employment type , years of service ]The planner names both missing variables in Step 3 of its reasoning and produces the 

23 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

clarification question “Regarding pension plan: could you specify employment type?” ShARC evidence chains provide the clearest Ask supervision in the dataset; single-turn ShARC queries with explicit multi-condition policy snippets represent the easiest Ask cases for the planner.         

> ×Ask →Abstain (misclassified) QuAC ·multi-turn ·turn 5

Query: “Did she win any awards for that performance?”     

> priya nair |requires |?unknown 1 [history truncated | 4 prior turns exceed 512-token budget]

Ground truth: Ask . This is the most common failure mode: 15 of 30 Ask cases are misclassified as Abstain . Two factors compound here. First, at turn 5 with four prior history turns, the full user turn exceeds the 512-token budget; the history block is truncated, removing the turns that establish she as Dr. Priya Nair and that performance as a 2019 keynote. Without this context, the dangling pronoun triggers the ambiguity heuristic and biases the planner toward Abstain . Second, the graph contains only a single requires 

edge with no relational context — a weak partial-path signal. This case directly motivates extending the maximum sequence length to 1,024 tokens in the full training run. 

Abstain cases     

> ✓Abstain — Correct ContractNLI ·single-turn

Query: “Does the contract prohibit the receiving party from reverse engineering any soft-ware?” 

> [no relevant nodes found in knowledge graph]

The reverse engineering clause (nda-11) has an 85.8% NotMentioned rate — the highest of all 17 ContractNLI clause types — and the specific NDA contains no relevant language. The planner routes cleanly to Abstain with justification: “graph has no resolvable path — ‘reverse engineering clause’ is entirely absent from the knowledge base.” This is the cleanest 

Abstain case: total topical absence from the KB.       

> ×Abstain →Answer (misclassified) QuAC ·single-turn

Query: “What is the GDP of Iceland?”         

> iceland |locate in |north atlantic iceland |known as |land of fire and ice

Ground truth: Abstain . The graph contains real nodes for Iceland with non-trivial relational content, producing a plausible confidence score and suppressing the empty-graph Abstain 

trigger. The planner’s Step 2 reasoning identifies Iceland as a matched node and incorrectly infers evidential sufficiency — it has not learned that the type of information connected to a node matters: geographical and cultural relations do not support an economic query. The answer agent subsequently generates a fabricated GDP figure. This is the hallucination-via-correct-routing failure mode, where a planner routing error directly enables downstream hallucination. Addressing this requires either richer node-type labelling in the graph or 

24 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

negative training examples contrasting entity-present but domain-mismatched queries against true Answer cases. 

## 11 Limitations and Future Work 

The finetuning dataset builder produces plausible, graph-grounded supervision labels, but label quality depends on KG extraction quality and GPT-4o-mini variable population accuracy. The 41.3% zero-triple rate means thin reasoning chains for a large fraction of training samples — these samples can reference matched node names but not relational paths, and the trained planner may therefore generalise differently on queries where the KG provides rich relational context versus sparse entity-only context. A full training run over the complete 34K dataset with more epochs, hyperparameter search, and larger LoRA rank would likely improve decision accuracy substantially; the baseline finetuning results should therefore be treated as a proof of concept for the pipeline architecture rather than a performance ceiling. Future directions include: 

• Scaling the finetuning run to the full 34K dataset with hyperparameter optimisation. 

• Extending the framework to retrieval over live knowledge bases with dynamic graph updates. 

• Investigating reinforcement learning from human feedback to align Ask /Abstain behaviour with user preferences. 

• Evaluating on domain-specific benchmarks (medical, legal, financial) where epistemic passivity has the highest stakes. 

• Studying the multi-turn convergence properties of the variable-tracking mechanism across longer dialogue chains. 

## 12 Conclusion 

We have presented PassiveQA, a three-action decision framework for epistemically calibrated question answering. Through systematic experiments across three RAG architectures, we established that inference-time retrieval improvements are insufficient to instil epistemic passivity — the decision behaviour must be internalised at training time. Our knowledge graph construction procedure, which encodes both semantic validity and three-action behavioural supervision into edge weights, provides a principled foundation for graph-grounded planner training. The finetuned Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 planner, trained on structured reasoning chains derived from graph evidence, represents a proof-of-concept for training-time alignment of epistemic decision-making. The three-agent execution architecture — in which the planner routes and specialised agents execute, with failures independently diagnosable as planner errors or agent errors — provides a clean separation of concerns that simplifies both debugging and targeted improvement of individual components. We hope this work motivates further research into decision-aware QA systems that know not just how to answer, but when to answer — and when not to. We emphasise that the presented results should be interpreted as indicative of broader trends rather than definitive benchmarks, and that further large-scale validation remains an important direction for future work. 

Reproducibility. All code, dataset construction scripts, knowledge graph artefacts, finetuning data, and model training configurations are released at https://github.com/MadsDoodle/ PassiveQA to support reproduction and extension of the results reported here. Should any ambiguity remain in the implementation details, readers are warmly encouraged to open an issue on the repository — all issues will be responded to promptly. 25 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

## Acknowledgements 

The author thanks the open-source communities behind HuggingFace Transformers, FAISS, spaCy, and the dataset creators of ShARC, QuAC, HotpotQA, and ContractNLI. 

## A System and Agent Prompts 

This appendix reproduces the exact prompts used in the PassiveQA pipeline. All prompts are passed as user-turn messages via the Mistral instruct chat template ( [INST]...[/INST] ) with the appropriate role prefix. Placeholders enclosed in {braces } are filled at runtime from the structured information state S(q). 

A.1 Planner System Prompt 

The system prompt below is prepended to every planner call and defines the decision logic, input tags, and required output format. It is the primary mechanism through which the three-action routing behaviour is expressed to the model at inference time. 

Planner — System Prompt (passed as role: system )

You are a decision planner for a question-answering system. Your task: given a user query, search the knowledge graph for relevant nodes, evaluate what information is present and what is missing, then decide the correct action. Decision logic: - Search the graph for nodes matching the query subject and known variables - If the graph contains a complete path connecting known entities → ANSWER - If the graph contains the topic but key linking variables are missing 

→ ASK (specify what is missing) - If the graph has no relevant nodes or the topic is absent → ABSTAIN You will receive: <query> | the user’s question <known_variables> | entities explicitly present in the query <graph_context> | KG triples: subject | relation | object <missing_variables> | variables required but not present <conversation_history>| prior turns (multi-turn queries only) Output format (strictly follow this): <reasoning> Step 1 | Query subject: identify what the query is asking about Step 2 | Graph search: what nodes were found, what connections exist Step 3 | Variable check: what is known, what is missing Step 4 | Decision rationale: why this action is correct </reasoning> <decision> ANSWER | ASK | ABSTAIN </decision> <justification> One sentence grounded in the graph evidence. </justification> Rules: - Reasoning must reference actual graph content, not generic statements 

26 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

- Never say "unspecified variables" | name the specific missing variable - If graph_context is empty, default to ABSTAIN unless context is clearly partial (then ASK) - Do not use prior world knowledge | only the graph context provided 

A.2 Answer Agent Prompt 

The Answer Agent is invoked after the planner routes to Answer . Retrieved chunks (from hybrid BM25 + dense retrieval, reranked by cross-encoder) are injected as {context block }.Conversation history from the last 3 turns is injected as {history block } when present. 

Answer Agent — User Prompt Template 

You are a knowledgeable assistant. Answer the query using ONLY the provided context. Be concise and factual. {history_block} Query: {query} Context: [Source 1 | {source} | {granularity}] {chunk_text_1} [Source 2 | {source} | {granularity}] {chunk_text_2} ... Answer: 

The agent receives no system-level instruction to decide whether to answer — that decision has already been made by the planner. Removing the decision burden from the generation step reduces hallucination pressure and simplifies the generation objective to strict context-grounded answering. 

A.3 Ask Agent Prompt 

The Ask Agent constructs a single, well-formed clarification question. The missing variable string is first cleaned of meta-prefixes and matched to a known anchor entity via SBERT similarity; the anchor populates {anchor }. Graph entities extracted from the top-5 KG triples populate 

{known context }.

Ask Agent — User Prompt Template 

Ask ONE focused clarification question to help answer the user’s query. {history_block} User query: {query} Missing information: {missing_str} Known context: {known_context} Rules: - Ask exactly ONE question ending with ? - Be specific about what is missing - Reference the query topic directly Clarification question: 

27 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Post-processing enforces a trailing ? if absent, and a fallback template “Regarding {anchor }:could you specify {missing variable }?” is used when the model output is under 10 characters. 100% of Ask outputs in evaluation were properly formed questions. 

A.4 Abstain Agent Prompt 

The Abstain Agent generates a specific, honest refusal. The {reason } field is populated deterministically from three branching conditions evaluated before the LLM call: (a) query too vague with no known variables; (b) graph has content but no connection to the specific question; (c) required variables are entirely absent from the KB. The {history note } field lists variables already resolved in prior turns. 

> Abstain Agent — User Prompt Template
> You cannot answer the following query from the available knowledge base. Write a brief, honest refusal. Explain why you cannot answer. Do NOT make up information. {history_note} Query: {query} Reason: {reason} Your response:

A minimum-length guard (20 characters) triggers a fallback: “I’m unable to answer this query. 

{reason } You may want to consult a specialised source.” The Abstain Agent explicitly distin-guishes between two causes of abstention: (a) the query topic is entirely absent from the KB, and (b) the topic is present but the required information is not recoverable through user clarification, communicating meaningfully to the user rather than issuing a generic refusal. 

A.5 Annotated Training Example 

The following is a representative Ask -action multi-turn training sample from the finetuning dataset, abbreviated for space. It illustrates the full prompt schema and the anchor-based clarification question construction described in §7.  

> Finetuning Dataset — Annotated Ask Sample (QuAC, multi-turn)
> [User turn] <conversation_history> Turn 1 | ASK | Q: "When was the album released?" | A: [Clarification requested: ’release date’ is needed]
> →resolved: ’release date’ </conversation_history> <resolved_variables> release date </resolved_variables> <remaining_unknowns> sales performance </remaining_unknowns> <query> How did the album sell? </query> <known_variables> album, release date </known_variables> <graph_context> best album of | requires | ?unknown_1 albums for the | requires | ?unknown_2 </graph_context> <missing_variables> sales performance </missing_variables> [Assistant turn | supervision label] <reasoning> Step 1 | Query subject: album, release date.

28 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Query asks: ’How did the album sell?’ Step 2 | Graph search: matched KG nodes: ’album’. Relations seen: requires. Variable placeholder nodes indicate missing information; path cannot be completed. Step 3 | Variable check: Known: album, release date. Required but absent from graph: ’sales performance’. Failure mode: INSUFFICIENT_VARIABLES. Step 4 | Decision rationale: graph has partial connections but cannot complete the reasoning path without: ’sales performance’. </reasoning> <decision> ASK </decision> <justification> Regarding album: could you specify sales performance? </justification> <clarification_question> Regarding album: could you specify sales performance? </clarification_question> 

The clarification question is generated by matching the missing variable string ( sales performance )against known variables via SBERT similarity (threshold 0.20) to find the anchor entity ( album ), then applying the template “Regarding [anchor]: could you specify [missing]?” 

A.6 Unified Dataset JSON Schema 

The schema below defines the canonical record format used for all four data sources after merging. Every field is present for all sources; source-specific sub-fields inside source specific 

are populated only where applicable and set to null otherwise. 

Unified Dataset Schema (JSON) 

{"id": "string", "query": "string", "context": { "documents": [ {"doc_id": "string", "text": "string", "url": "string", "file_name": "string", "chunk_idx": "int", "total_chunks": "int", "spans": ["[int, int]"] }]}, "state": { "known_variables": ["string"], "missing_variables": ["string"], "constraints": ["string"], "failure_mode": "COMPLETE | INSUFFICIENT_VARIABLES | MULTI_HOP_REQUIRED", "difficulty": "easy | medium | hard | very_hard", "completeness": "complete | partial | incomplete" }, "action": "ANSWER | ASK | ABSTAIN", "response": "string", 

29 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA               

> "metadata": { "source": "quac | sharc | hotpotqa | contract_nli", "multi_turn": "bool", "turn_id": "int | null", "dialogue_id": "string | null", "requires_reasoning": "bool", "num_missing_variables": "int", "variable_types": ["string"], "source_specific": { // ShARC "sharc_answer": "Yes | No | Follow-on | Irrelevant", "evidence_depth": "int", "history_depth": "int", "utterance_id": "string", // HotpotQA "question_type": "bridge | comparison", "level": "easy | medium | hard", "num_supporting_facts": "int", // ContractNLI "nli_choice": "Entailment | Contradiction | NotMentioned", "label_id": "string", "num_spans": "int", // QuAC "yesno": "y | n | x", "followup_flag":"y | n | m" }}}

Key field semantics. The state object is the core contribution of the schema: known variables 

and missing variables drive both knowledge graph traversal and planner finetuning supervi-sion. The failure mode field encodes why a query cannot be answered as-is — COMPLETE 

samples always have an empty missing variables list and map exclusively to Answer ;

INSUFFICIENT VARIABLES samples cover all Ask and most Abstain cases; MULTI HOP REQUIRED 

flags HotpotQA bridge queries where multi-document evidence is mandatory. The source specific 

block preserves original dataset annotations so the unified schema remains lossless with respect to each source’s native label space. 

## References 

Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., K¨ uttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.-t., Rockt¨ aschel, T., Riedel, S., and Kiela, D. (2020). Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 33, pages 9459–9474. Karpukhin, V., O˘ guz, B., Min, S., Lewis, P., Wu, L., Edunov, S., Chen, D., and Yih, W.-t. (2020). Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2020 , pages 6769–6781. Guu, K., Lee, K., Tung, Z., Pasupat, P., and Chang, M.-W. (2020). REALM: Retrieval-augmented language model pre-training. In Proceedings of ICML 2020 .Izacard, G. and Grave, E. (2021). Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open domain question answering. In Proceedings of EACL 2021 , pages 874–880. 30 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Borgeaud, S., Mensch, A., Hoffmann, J., Cai, T., Rutherford, E., Millican, K., van den Driessche, G., Lespiau, J.-B., Damoc, B., Clark, A., et al. (2022). Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In Proceedings of ICML 2022 , pages 2206–2240. Robertson, S. and Zaragoza, H. (2009). The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval , 3(4):333–389. Santhanam, K., Khattab, O., Saad-Falcon, J., Potts, C., and Zaharia, M. (2022). ColBERTv2: Effective and efficient retrieval via lightweight late interaction. In Proceedings of NAACL 2022 , pages 3715–3734. Gao, Y., Xiong, Y., Gao, X., Jia, K., Pan, J., Bi, Y., Dai, Y., Sun, J., Wang, M., and Wang, H. (2023). Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 .Ji, Z., Lee, N., Frieske, R., Yu, T., Su, D., Xu, Y., Ishii, E., Bang, Y. J., Madotto, A., and Fung, P. (2023). Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM Computing Surveys ,55(12):1–38. Maynez, J., Narayan, S., Bohnet, B., and McDonald, R. (2020). On faithfulness and factuality in abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of ACL 2020 , pages 1906–1919. Huang, L., Yu, W., Ma, W., Zhong, W., Feng, Z., Wang, H., Chen, Q., Peng, W., Feng, X., Qin, B., and Liu, T. (2025). Alleviating hallucinations from knowledge misalignment in large language models via selective abstention learning. In Proceedings of ACL 2025 (Long Papers) .Goswami, S. and Kurra, S. (2025). HALT-RAG: A task-adaptable framework for hallucination detection with calibrated NLI ensembles and abstention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07475 .Li, Y., Fu, X., Verma, G., Buitelaar, P., and Liu, M. (2025). Mitigating hallucination in large language models: An application-oriented survey on RAG, reasoning, and agentic systems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24476 .Geifman, Y. and El-Yaniv, R. (2017). Selective Classification for Deep Neural Networks In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , pages 6327–6338. Xin, J., Tang, R., Yu, Y., and Lin, J. (2021). The art of abstention: Selective prediction and error regularization for natural language processing. In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2021 ,pages 1040–1051. Varshney, N. and Baral, C. (2023). Post-abstention: Towards reliably re-attempting the abstained instances in QA. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01812 .Yin, Z., Sun, Q., Guo, Q., Wu, J., Qiu, X., and Huang, X. (2024). Do large language models know what they don’t know? In Findings of ACL 2024 .Phillips, E., Gustafsson, F. K., Wu, S., Thakur, A., and Clifton, D. A. (2026). Entropy alone is insufficient for safe selective prediction in LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.21172 .Feng, S., Shi, W., Wang, Y., Ding, W., Balachandran, V., and Tsvetkov, Y. (2024). Don’t hallucinate, abstain: Identifying LLM knowledge gaps via multi-LLM collaboration. In 

Proceedings of ACL 2024 . arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00367 .Saeidi, M., Bartolo, M., Lewis, P., Singh, S., Rockt¨ aschel, T., Sheldon, M., Bouchard, G., and Riedel, S. (2018). Interpretation of natural language rules in conversational machine reading. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2018 , pages 2087–2097. 31 Madhav S Baidya PassiveQA 

Choi, E., He, H., Iyyer, M., Yatskar, M., Yih, W.-t., Choi, Y., Liang, P., and Zettlemoyer, L. (2018). QuAC: Question answering in context. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2018 , pages 2174–2184. Aliannejadi, M., Zamani, H., Crestani, F., and Croft, W. B. (2019). Asking clarifying questions in open-domain information-seeking conversations. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2019 , pages 475–484. Rao, S. and Daum´ e III, H. (2018). Learning to ask good questions: Ranking clarification questions using neural expected value of perfect information. In Proceedings of ACL 2018 ,pages 2737–2746. Zhou, S., Ouyang, S., Zhang, Z., and Zhao, H. (2023). Towards end-to-end open conversational machine reading. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023 ,pages 2064–2076, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yasunaga, M., Ren, H., Bosselut, A., Liang, P., and Leskovec, J. (2021). QA-GNN: Reasoning with language models and knowledge graphs for question answering. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2021 , pages 535–546. Sun, H., Dhingra, B., Zaheer, M., Mazaitis, K., Salakhutdinov, R., and Cohen, W. W. (2019). Open domain question answering using early fusion of knowledge bases and text. In Proceedings of EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019 , pages 4231–4242. Lin, B. Y., Chen, X., Chen, J., and Ren, X. (2019). KagNet: Knowledge-aware graph networks for commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019 , pages 2829–2839. Jiang, P., Ouyang, S., Jiao, Y., Zhong, M., Tian, R., and Han, J. (2025). A survey on retrieval and structuring augmented generation with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.10697 .Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., and Chen, W. (2021). LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 .Dettmers, T., Pagnoni, A., Holtzman, A., and Zettlemoyer, L. (2023). QLoRA: Efficient finetuning of quantized LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14314 .Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C. L., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A., et al. (2022). Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 35, pages 27730–27744. Rafailov, R., Sharma, A., Mitchell, E., Manning, C. D., Ermon, S., and Finn, C. (2023). Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 36. Jiang, A. Q., Sablayrolles, A., Mensch, A., Bamford, C., Chaplot, D. S., de las Casas, D., Bressand, F., Lengyel, G., Lample, G., Saulnier, L., et al. (2023). Mistral 7B. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825 .Yang, Z., Qi, P., Zhang, S., Bengio, Y., Cohen, W. W., Salakhutdinov, R., and Manning, C. D. (2018). HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In 

Proceedings of EMNLP 2018 , pages 2369–2380. Koreeda, Y. and Manning, C. D. (2021). ContractNLI: A dataset for document-level natural language inference for contracts. In Findings of EMNLP 2021 , pages 1907–1919. 32