Title: From CRUD to Autonomous Agents: Formal Validation and Zero-Trust Security for Semantic Gateways in AI-Native Enterprise Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.25555v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Apr 2026 00:55:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
From CRUD to Autonomous Agents: 

# Formal Validation and Zero-Trust Security for Semantic Gateways in AI-Native Enterprise Systems 

Ignacio Peyrano 

Universidad Austral Rosario, Argentina 

peyranoignacio@gmail.com 

April 2026 

Abstract. Enterprise software engineering is undergoing a foundational structural transition. The industry is rapidly shifting away from deterministic architectures based on Create, Read, Update, Delete (CRUD) operations, Representational State Transfer (REST) contracts, and predefined execution flows. In their place, orga-nizations are adopting AI-native systems where large language models function as cognitive orchestrators capable of interpreting ambiguous intentions, dynamically composing computational tools, and executing complex, multi-step plans. However, this transition introduces a profound architectural and security tension. While the probabilistic nature of large language models enables a superior, highly flexible se-mantic interaction layer, it simultaneously weakens classical mechanisms for software validation, granular access control, and formal testing. This research proposes the design, formal mathematical validation, and empirical evaluation of a Semantic Gateway architecture governed by the Model Context Pro-tocol ( mcp ). Positioned as a robust, stateful alternative to exposing granular REST topologies directly to artificial agents, the Semantic Gateway reframes the enterprise 

api as a semantic surface where tools are dynamically discovered, authorized, and executed based on intent, context, and rigorous policy enforcement. The central sci-entific contribution is built upon a fundamental paradigm shift: autonomous agents must not be validated as traditional software modules nor as simple API consumers, but as stochastic state-transition systems whose behavior must be abstracted, fuzzed, and audited through enabled-tool graphs. 

To operationalize this principle, the proposed architecture introduces a compre-hensive three-layer Zero-Trust security model comprising a pre-inference Semantic Firewall, deterministic Tool-Level Role-Based Access Control ( rbac ), and out-of-band Cryptographic Human-in-the-Loop ( h-i-t-l ) approval. Furthermore, this re-search adapts Enabledness-Preserving Abstractions ( epa s) and greybox semantic fuzzing methodologies—historically utilized for the formal verification of immutable blockchain smart contracts—to dynamically audit agent behavior in enterprise en-vironments. Extensive experimental results demonstrate an 84.2% reduction in incidental code. Through the execution of 500,000 multi-turn fuzzing sequences, the methodology achieved a 100% discovery rate of hidden, unauthorized state 

> arXiv:2604.25555v1 [cs.CR] 28 Apr 2026

transitions, proving that dynamic formal verification is not only viable but strictly necessary for the secure deployment of agentic enterprise systems. 

Keywords: autonomous agents, semantic gateway, Model Context Protocol, Zero-Trust security, formal verification, Enabledness-Preserving Abstractions, semantic fuzzing, bola , Open Policy Agent, enterprise AI. 

Contents 

1 Introduction 42 Background and Related Work 4

2.1 REST, GraphQL, and the Limits of Deterministic Contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . 42.2 The Model Context Protocol and Tool Calling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.3 Agent Orchestration: LangChain versus LangGraph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.4 AI Security Frameworks: OWASP GenAI and NIST AI RMF . . . . . . . . . . . 52.5 Open Policy Agent and Policy as Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.6 Formal Verification, Smart Contract Fuzzing, and EPAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

3 Problem Statement 64 Semantic Gateway Architecture 6

4.1 Architectural Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

5 Zero-Trust Security Model 8

5.1 Layer 1: Semantic Firewall and Cognitive Isolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85.2 Layer 2: Tool-Level RBAC and Micro-segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95.3 Layer 3: Cryptographic Human-in-the-Loop Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

6 Formal Model 9

6.1 Vector Space Semantic Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96.2 Planning as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 6.3 Enabledness-Preserving Abstractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 

7 Semantic Fuzzing Methodology 11 

7.1 The Semantic Fuzzer Harness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 7.2 State Space Optimization Heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 

8 Proof-of-Concept Implementation 14 

8.1 Implementation Stack and Component Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 8.2 Test Suite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 8.3 Reproducible Fuzzer Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 8.4 Running the PoC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

9 Experimental Setup 16 10 Results 16 

10.1 Productivity and Incidental Code Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 10.2 Security and Adversarial Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 10.3 Formal Verification Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 10.4 Performance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 10.5 PoC Validation: Independently Reproducible Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 211 Discussion 18 12 Threats to Validity 18 13 Related Work Comparison 19 14 Future Work 19 15 Conclusion 20 Artifact Availability 20 A Tool Schemas 22 B Policy Rules 23 C Fuzzing Campaign Logs 23 D EPA Graphs 24 

31 Introduction 

The evolution of enterprise software architecture has historically been driven by the imperative to manage system complexity through deterministic, highly predictable abstractions. From struc-tured monolithic systems to Service-Oriented Architectures and microservices proliferation, the underlying engineering paradigm has remained remarkably stable: software design predicated on static rules, rigid interface contracts, and entirely predictable execution flows. However, the integration of autonomous agentic artificial intelligence systems into enterprise environments pre-cipitates the rapid collapse of this structural rigidity. The transition from systems of explicit instruction to systems of intent-based execution demands a fundamental rethinking of how digital systems interact, authenticate, and maintain verifiable security boundaries. For decades, dominant communication architectures—namely REST, GraphQL, and Remote Procedure Call—have operated on a stable assumption: the consumer possesses a priori knowl-edge of the backend topology. When the consumer is no longer a human developer or a determin-istic software service, but an autonomous agent utilizing a large language model ( llm ) capable of probabilistic reasoning, this assumption fails completely. Exposing traditional API endpoints directly to llm s induces severe architectural friction. Foremost is context window bloat : exposing an agent to hundreds of granular endpoints via extensive OpenAPI specifications rapidly consumes the model’s token limits [4]. Furthermore, the inherently stochastic nature of the llm introduces novel threat vectors that traditional API gateways were not designed to mitigate, including multi-turn prompt injections, context poison-ing, and Broken Object Level Authorization ( bola ) exploitation achieved through hallucinated combinations of otherwise benign tools [17]. To resolve these escalating architectural tensions, this research introduces the comprehensive design and formal validation of a Semantic Gateway . Rather than acting as a simple, stateless routing layer, the Semantic Gateway operates as an epistemic and operational frontier between the stochastic agent and the deterministic enterprise backend. Crucially, this research pioneers the importation of formal verification techniques from the domain of blockchain smart contracts. By mathematically modeling the agent’s environment as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process ( pomdp ) and applying Enabledness-Preserving Abstractions alongside greybox seman-tic fuzzing, the system transforms the unpredictable behavior of large language models into a mathematically auditable, finite graph of state transitions. 

2 Background and Related Work 

To establish the scientific gap addressed by the Semantic Gateway, it is necessary to critically examine the current landscape of API contracts, agent orchestration frameworks, artificial intel-ligence security policies, and formal verification methodologies. The existing literature demon-strates rapid advancements in isolated domains, yet reveals a profound lack of cohesive, formal methodologies for securing emergent behaviors of autonomous agents. 

2.1 REST, GraphQL, and the Limits of Deterministic Contracts 

The Representational State Transfer architecture established a resource-oriented paradigm that remains foundational for web interoperability, while GraphQL introduced a strongly typed al-ternative allowing clients to declare the exact shape of required data. Both models succeed brilliantly under the premise of deterministic consumption. However, in agentic scenarios, they generate immense semantic friction: the llm is forced to act as an impromptu network compiler, translating high-level natural language objectives into highly specific HTTP methods and nested JSON payloads [4]. This cognitive load significantly increases the probability of tool hallucina-tion and execution failure, proving that REST is an insufficient abstraction layer for cognitive agents. 42.2 The Model Context Protocol and Tool Calling 

The Model Context Protocol ( mcp ), released by Anthropic in late 2024, has rapidly emerged as the open standard to unify how AI models connect to external data sources and computational tools [2]. Operating over a standardized JSON-RPC implementation, mcp defines the schema for exposing functional tools to a model, allowing the agent to dynamically discover capabili-ties at runtime. However, researchers have identified critical security limitations: the protocol itself intentionally delegates authorization to the underlying transport layer, meaning seamless interoperability does not inherently guarantee governance or cryptographic security [1]. 

2.3 Agent Orchestration: LangChain versus LangGraph 

The orchestration of llm agents has evolved significantly, shifting from linear, stateless pipelines exemplified by LangChain, toward graph-based, stateful architectures like LangGraph [18]. Lang-Graph natively models multi-agent workflows as cyclical state machines, where nodes represent discrete units of work and edges represent conditional routing logic based on the model’s out-put [13]. While LangGraph effectively manages the operational flow and memory persistence of complex agentic loops, it does not inherently provide any formal verification of the resulting state space [12]. 

2.4 AI Security Frameworks: OWASP GenAI and NIST AI RMF 

The security posture of llm applications is currently guided by prominent frameworks such as the OWASP Top 10 for Large Language Model Applications [17] and the NIST Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework [14]. OWASP highlights critical vulnerabilities including Prompt Injection, Insecure Output Handling, and Excessive Agency, explicitly warning against granting models unfettered access to enterprise APIs. However, neither framework offers a concrete, mathematical methodology for dynamically validating the execution boundaries of an agent at runtime [6]. 

2.5 Open Policy Agent and Policy as Code 

The Open Policy Agent ( opa ) is a general-purpose, open-source policy engine that utilizes a highly optimized declarative language known as Rego to decouple policy decision-making from the underlying application’s business logic [15]. By utilizing this engine, organizations can define strict rbac and Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC) rules as immutable code [16]. In the context of AI agents, opa can intercept a model’s request to execute a tool and deterministi-cally evaluate whether the agent possesses the requisite cryptographic permissions, ensuring that authorization remains a deterministic function outside the model’s probabilistic influence [7]. 

2.6 Formal Verification, Smart Contract Fuzzing, and EPAs 

Due to the strict immutability of blockchain environments, decentralized smart contracts are routinely subjected to rigorous formal verification. Tools such as Echidna utilize property-based testing and greybox fuzzing to generate hundreds of thousands of random transaction sequences, aiming to violate predefined system invariants [9]. A highly effective abstraction model is the Enabledness-Preserving Abstraction ( epa ), which quotients an infinite programmatic state space into finite equivalence classes grouped based on the specific set of methods they currently en-able [5]. This paper pioneers the direct adaptation of epa s to AI agents, treating the agent’s available tools as the set of abstract methods, and utilizing targeted semantic fuzzing to exhaus-tively map the agent’s emergent behavioral graph. 53 Problem Statement 

As global enterprises aggressively integrate agentic AI into their core operations, they confront an asymmetrical and highly unpredictable risk landscape. Traditional software components are inherently deterministic; given the exact same inputs and system state, they produce the exact same outputs. Autonomous agents driven by llm s, however, are fundamentally stochastic systems. 

Central Thesis. Autonomous agents must not be validated as traditional software nor as simple API consumers, but as stochastic state-transition systems whose be-havior must be abstracted, fuzzed, and audited through enabled-tool graphs. 

The problem manifests along four critical dimensions: 

Contextual Vulnerability and Memory Tainting. An autonomous agent routinely in-gests data from external, untrusted sources. During this process, the agent may inadvertently read a malicious instruction embedded within the text—an attack vector known as indirect prompt injection . If the agent’s working memory becomes tainted, it may subsequently invoke a write-access tool using the compromised context. Because traditional perimeter defenses au-thenticate the identity of the agent rather than the origin of the prompt context, the malicious mutation is executed, bypassing standard security measures entirely. 

Semantic Broken Object Level Authorization ( bola ). This vulnerability occurs when an application correctly authenticates a user but completely fails to verify that the user possesses authorization to access or modify a specific object identifier requested in the API call [20]. An agent, capable of generating synthetic parameters or hallucinating object identifiers during its reasoning process, can inadvertently or maliciously attempt to access unauthorized records [8]. 

Emergent, Unpredictable Transitions. A severe vulnerability may only manifest when a state-modifying tool is immediately followed by a privilege-escalating tool—an emergent inter-action sequence that static code analysis and standard integration tests cannot reliably predict or cover. 

The API Paradox. Exposing highly granular REST endpoints to a language model leads to massive context window bloat. Conversely, creating monolithic macro-tools designed to reduce token consumption leads to tightly coupled, inflexible systems that defeat the entire purpose of dynamic, modular agent composition [4]. 

4 Semantic Gateway Architecture 

To bridge the architectural chasm between stochastic agent reasoning and deterministic enterprise execution, this research proposes the comprehensive design of the Semantic Gateway. Governed by mcp , the Semantic Gateway acts as a stateful, intelligent infrastructure layer that completely abstracts heterogeneous enterprise backend systems into a unified, highly governed semantic interface. 

4.1 Architectural Components 

The architecture is composed of interconnected layers designed to process, sanitize, route, and audit agentic interactions. 

Intent Intake Layer. Serves as the primary ingress point, ingesting unstructured natural language requests directly from users or semi-structured JSON payloads generated by upstream autonomous systems. This layer decouples the user’s ultimate objective from the specific techni-cal mechanisms required to achieve it. 6Semantic Normalizer and Vectorizer. Converts the raw linguistic request into a highly dense mathematical vector embedding, normalizing ambiguous human terminology into a canon-ical organizational vocabulary. 

Semantic Firewall. Operating entirely pre-inference, this layer utilizes highly efficient micro-models, such as DeBERTa-v3, to analyze the embedded intent for adversarial patterns, prompt injection signatures, or blatant policy violations before the costly and vulnerable primary 

llm is engaged. 

Embedding Router and Tool Registry. Calculates the cosine similarity between the embedded intent and the semantic descriptions of all available mcp tools. It intelligently filters the global tool registry to construct an optimal, highly relevant subset of tools that comfortably fits within the agent’s context window. 

Chain-of-Thought Planner. The core cognitive engine: the llm synthesizes a multi-step execution plan, deciding which tools to call and in what exact sequence. However, the agent’s plan is treated merely as a highly suspect suggestion. 

Policy Enforcement Point. Prior to execution, the proposed action, the target resource, and the generated parameters are evaluated deterministically by an opa instance. If the action violates the strict rbac logic, it is instantly blocked. 

Cryptographic Human-in-the-Loop Gate. If the opa flags the requested tool as highly critical or irreversible, execution is suspended. A secure cryptographic challenge detailing the intent and parameters is generated and pushed to a human operator for out-of-band signature approval, ensuring that autonomous agents cannot unilaterally execute destructive actions. 

Audit Ledger. Maintains an immutable, hash-chained record of the original intent, the generated plan, the evaluated policy, the applied tool parameters, and the final state mutation, providing perfect forensic traceability for the autonomous system. Figure 1 illustrates the complete component flow of the Semantic Gateway. 7Figure 1: Semantic Gateway architecture. The intent flows from enterprise sources through the Semantic Firewall, Embedding Router, Chain-of-Thought Planner, and Policy Enforcement Point before reaching the Tool Runtime and Audit Ledger. 

5 Zero-Trust Security Model 

The foundational security philosophy of the Semantic Gateway relies on a singular, uncompromis-ing premise: the large language model is inherently untrusted . The model possesses operational agency to plan and suggest, but absolutely zero authoritative permission to execute. To enforce this strict separation, the architecture implements a defense-in-depth model comprising three distinct, overlapping layers of verification. 

5.1 Layer 1: Semantic Firewall and Cognitive Isolation 

Positioned significantly before the main llm inference phase, the Semantic Firewall serves to filter adversarial input and meticulously manage context safety. A primary function of this layer is Context Isolation : the firewall enforces strict attention barriers within the transformer’s processing layers, ensuring that user-provided text or external data cannot overwrite the system’s foundational meta-prompt or core security directives. Furthermore, the firewall implements 

Taint-Aware Memory using advanced information flow tracking. Any data retrieved from an untrusted source is immediately tagged in the agent’s memory state as tainted. If the agent subsequently attempts to pass this tainted context into a critical mutation tool, the Semantic Firewall deterministically aborts the invocation. 85.2 Layer 2: Tool-Level RBAC and Micro-segmentation 

Traditional REST architectures rely heavily on JSON Web Tokens validating broad access to entire network routing paths. The Semantic Gateway abolishes these routes entirely, shifting the security boundary to the tool level. It maps Non-Human Identities directly to specific tool schemas defined by mcp . When the language model determines it needs to call a specific tool, the request is instantly routed to the opa . This engine evaluates a strict Rego policy that cross-references the agent’s assigned non-human role against the granular preconditions required by the tool. This micro-segmentation enforces the principle of least privilege at the function level. 

5.3 Layer 3: Cryptographic Human-in-the-Loop Integration 

For high-stakes, irreversible operations, allowing full autonomous execution introduces an unac-ceptable level of operational risk. The Semantic Gateway integrates a stringent protocol inspired by the IETF drafts for Confirmation with Human in the Loop ( cheq ) [11] and the Agent Cre-dential Attestation Protocol ( acap ) [10]. When a critical tool is invoked, the gateway initiates a speculative suspension, pausing the execution thread entirely. It then generates an immutable evidence package by hashing the proposed action, the exact parameters, and the agent’s recorded chain-of-thought. This challenge is pushed out-of-band to an authorized human’s secure device. The gateway resumes execution only if the signature verification proves mathematically sound. Figure 2 depicts the three-layer defense-in-depth model and the decision paths for denial and execution.  

> Figure 2: Three-layer Zero-Trust security model. Each incoming intent must survive Layer 1 (Semantic Firewall), Layer 2 (OPA-based Tool RBAC with BOLA ownership verification), and Layer 3 (Crypto-graphic Human-in-the-Loop) before any tool execution is permitted.

6 Formal Model 

The rigorous validation and mathematical auditing of the Semantic Gateway requires express-ing its core operations, routing decisions, and state transitions through formal mathematical constructs. 

6.1 Vector Space Semantic Routing 

The semantic routing mechanism is formally defined within a continuous, highly dimensional vector space V ⊂ Rn. Given a natural language user intent q and a pre-trained embedding model 

φ, the intent vector is calculated as: 

vq = φ(q) (1) Let the set {vti }|T | 

> i=1

represent the mathematical semantic embeddings of the descriptive schemas of all available mcp tools. The relevance of any specific tool ti to the current intent is 9computed utilizing the Cosine Similarity metric: 

sim( vq, vti ) = vq · vti

∥vq∥ · ∥ vti ∥ (2) To actively prevent the degradation of reasoning capabilities caused by context window bloat-ing, the gateway resolves a subset optimization challenge, mathematically analogous to the clas-sical Knapsack problem. It selects the optimal set of tools T ∗ subject to a strict maximum token limit Lmax :

T ∗ = argmax   

> T⊆Tall P
> ti∈Ttokens( ti)≤Lmax

X

> ti∈T

sim( vq, vti ) (3) 

6.2 Planning as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process 

The agent’s complex, multi-step tool orchestration process is formally modeled as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process ( pomdp ). In this construct, the actual business state 

s ∈ S is only partially observable to the agent, which yields periodic observations o ∈ O via the execution outputs of tools. The action space A comprises the set of tools currently permitted by the policy engine. The probability of the agent achieving a specific goal g, given a starting intent q and an initial context h0, relies heavily on the llm ’s internal policy πθ, parameterized by its neural network weights θ:

P (g | q, h 0) = X

> τ

πθ(at | ht) · P (ot+1 | st, a t) · δ(st+1 , g ) (4) where ht represents the historical, dynamic context comprising all previous actions and observa-tions. Because the policy πθ is inherently stochastic and highly vulnerable to adversarial drift through prompt injection, the mathematical integration of deterministic opa rules is critical. This policy matrix ensures that the transition probability P (ai | opa deny ) is strictly forced to 0,permanently overriding the model’s probabilistic likelihood of failure. 

6.3 Enabledness-Preserving Abstractions 

To formally verify the security of the entire agentic system, the concrete, potentially infinite state of the enterprise application is abstracted into a highly structured graph using epa s. This mechanism groups concrete programmatic states into abstract equivalence classes based entirely on which specific tools are currently enabled by the strict preconditions of the rbac matrix [5]. 

Definition 1 (epa of an Agentic System) . Formally, the agent’s entire behavioral abstraction is defined as a tuple A = ( T, ˜S, ˜s0, ˜δ), where: 

• T is the complete set of all available tools within the ecosystem. 

• ˜S ⊆ 2T is the power set of T , where each distinct abstract state ˜s represents a unique, valid combination of currently permitted tools. 

• ˜s0 ∈ ˜S is the initial, default permission state of the agent. 

• ˜δ : T × ˜S → ˜S is the critical transition function detailing how invoking a tool t while residing in abstract state ˜s modifies the underlying context to reach a new abstract state. 

A valid state transition is expressed as: 

˜δ(t, ˜s) = ˜ s′ ⇐⇒ ∃ c ∈ C : c |= φ(˜ s) ∧ Exec( t, params ) |= c′ ∧ ˜s′ = enabled( c′) (5) This formula dictates that a valid state transition exists if and only if, under the current context c that perfectly satisfies all system invariants and the specific predicates of state ˜s, the 10 successful execution of tool t results in a new context that flawlessly satisfies the predicates defin-ing abstract state ˜s′. This mathematical foundation is what allows the system to be rigorously fuzzed. Figure 3 shows the concrete epa graph for the Document Sharing workflow evaluated in this paper, including the discovered vulnerability.        

> Figure 3: Enabledness-Preserving Abstraction ( epa ) graph for the Document Sharing workflow. The yellow self-loop on SHARING_WITH_THIRD_PARTY represents the bola vulnerability discovered by the se-mantic fuzzer at iteration 52. The transition is absent in the fixed epa after the Rego policy amendment.

7 Semantic Fuzzing Methodology 

Traditional unit testing is entirely inadequate for securing stochastic autonomous agents, as it cannot account for emergent reasoning patterns or unpredictable tool combinations. There-fore, this research adapts advanced greybox fuzzing methodologies—proven highly effective in discovering devastating vulnerabilities within immutable Ethereum smart contracts via analysis engines like Echidna [9, 22] and Halmos—into a bespoke semantic fuzzing framework designed specifically for the Semantic Gateway. 

7.1 The Semantic Fuzzer Harness 

The automated fuzzer harness is designed to autonomously inject hundreds of thousands of stochastic intents, highly mutated structural parameters, and complex adversarial context se-quences directly into the gateway architecture. It operates by systematically attempting to falsify predefined mathematical assertions regarding the system’s security posture. For example, the harness dynamically constructs and executes test cases structured as follows:      

> 1function f rom_s tate_ A_to_ B_by_ tool_K ( params ) {
> 2require ( precondition_state_A ) ;
> 3execute_tool_K ( params ) ;

11 4 assert (! preconditions_state_B ) ;   

> 5}
> Listing 1: Semantic invariant test analogous to Echidna harness

If the fuzzer algorithm discovers a specific combination of adversarial parameters or prompt sequences that successfully falsifies the terminal assertion, it mathematically proves the existence of a highly dangerous, undocumented state transition from abstract state ˜sA to abstract state 

˜sB via the execution of tool tK .

7.2 State Space Optimization Heuristics 

Because the potential abstract state space of the agentic ecosystem scales exponentially, repre-sented as O(2 |T |) where |T | is the number of available tools, exhaustive, brute-force fuzzing risks catastrophic combinatorial explosion. To ensure the fuzzing process remains computationally tractable, three critical reduction heuristics are applied: 

Reduce_True. Tools categorized as purely read-only inherently lack restrictive state-modifying preconditions and are universally available across all states. These tools are globally abstracted out of the transition matrix, effectively halving the explored state space for every such tool identified. 

Reduce_Equal. If multiple distinct tools require the exact same access claims within the opa matrix, their logical preconditions are fused during the exploration phase, preventing redundant testing of identical authorization pathways. 

Unreachable State Pruning. By utilizing a static formal verifier prior to the dynamic fuzzing phase, and setting a specific boundary depth parameter, the algorithm intelligently prunes entire branches of the transitional graph that are mathematically proven to be unreachable, significantly focusing the heavy iterations of the dynamic fuzzer on highly viable threat vectors. Figure 4 illustrates the complete execution flow of the semantic fuzzer. 12 Figure 4: Semantic fuzzer execution flow. The guided mutation strategy (80% valid-tool selection, 20% adversarial) efficiently navigates toward boundary states. A violation immediately halts the campaign and reports the falsified invariant with its full call sequence. 

13 8 Proof-of-Concept Implementation 

To validate that the proposed architecture is not merely theoretical, a fully functional open-source proof-of-concept ( poc ) was developed in Python and is publicly available as a reproducible artifact [19]. The implementation covers every architectural component described in Sections 4, 5, and 7, with a deliberate emphasis on testability and offline execution: no GPU, no proprietary model API, and no external service is required to run the full test suite. 

8.1 Implementation Stack and Component Mapping 

Table 1 maps each architectural concept from the paper to its concrete implementation file. The semantic router uses TF-IDF with cosine similarity as a drop-in replacement for dense vector embeddings, making the poc fully self-contained. The opa -inspired policy engine is implemented as a pure Python RBAC evaluator that enforces the same ownership constraints described in section 5. The audit ledger uses SQLite as the persistence backend, which can be trivially replaced by EventStoreDB or PostgreSQL in a production deployment.  

> Table 1: Mapping between architectural components (paper) and implementation files ( poc ).

Paper Component File Notes 

Semantic Firewall gateway/firewall.py 12 regex injection patterns; taint-aware context tags ([EMAIL_BODY] ,

[EXTERNAL] )Tool Registry gateway/registry.py 12 MCP-style tools across READ /WRITE / CRITICAL tiers Semantic Router gateway/router.py TF-IDF + cosine similarity; fully offline Policy Engine gateway/policy.py OPA-inspired RBAC; role hierarchy; BOLA ownership checks Audit Ledger gateway/audit.py SHA-256 hash-chained, append-only; SQLite backend EPA Graph gateway/epa.py NetworkX MultiDiGraph; DOT export; 

buggy flag toggles the BOLA edge Claude Planner gateway/planner.py Anthropic API (optional); deterministic mock fallback Semantic Fuzzer fuzzer/semantic_fuzzer.py Invariant-based; guided 80% valid / 20% adversarial mutation FastAPI Gateway gateway/main.py Endpoints: /intent , /audit , /epa ,

/health 

8.2 Test Suite 

The poc ships with a comprehensive test suite of 47 automated tests organized across four modules, verifiable with a single command ( pytest tests/ -v ): 14 Table 2: Test suite breakdown by component. 

Module Tests Key Scenarios 

test_firewall.py 9 Clean intents pass; 7 injection variants blocked; taint detection; l 

test_policy.py 10 Role hierarchy; BOLA cross-department; Admin lockout prevention; t 

test_audit.py 8 Chain integrity; tamper detection; genesis hash; deny-also-

test_router_and_fuzzer.py 20 Semantic routing accuracy; 5 EPA state transitions; bug detection; 

Total 47 All passing 8.3 Reproducible Fuzzer Output 

The poc fuzzer provides a directly reproducible demonstration of the core claim of this pa-per. Running python -m fuzzer.semantic_fuzzer produces the following deterministic output (seed = 42):                                                  

> 1[1/2] Running fuzzer on BUGGY EPA ( pre - fix ) ...
> 2INVARIANT VIOLATION : ’ NoSharingOverwrite ’
> 3Call sequence :
> 4INITIAL [ create_document ] -> DOC_CREATED
> 5DOC_CREATED [ initiate_share ] -> PENDING_SHARE
> 6PENDING_SHARE [ accept_sharing_request ] -> SHARING_WITH_THIRD_PARTY
> 7SHARING_WITH_THIRD_PARTY [ accept_sharing_request ] -> !! VIOLATION !!
> 8Iterations to discovery : 52 (0.00 s )
> 910 [2/2] Running fuzzer on FIXED EPA ( post - fix ) ...
> 11 No invariant violations found after 500 iterations (0.02 s ) .
> 12 Discovered transitions : 5

Listing 2: Actual fuzzer output from the PoC (seed=42, max_iter=500). 

Two findings are immediately verifiable from this output. First, the semantic fuzzer dis-covers the AcceptSharingRequest bola vulnerability in only 52 iterations out of a possible 500, confirming that the guided mutation strategy (80% valid-tool preference) is highly effi-cient at reaching dangerous boundary states. Second, after the Rego policy correction is ap-plied ( EPAGraph(buggy=False) ), 500 iterations produce zero violations and the observed graph achieves 100% correspondence with the theoretical design — an exact replication of the paper’s central formal verification claim, now in reproducible open-source code. 

8.4 Running the PoC 

The complete implementation is available at: 

https://github.com/PeyranoDev/semantic-gateway-poc 

Quickstart (Python 3.11+):                                 

> 1git clone https :// github . com / PeyranoDev / semantic - gateway - poc
> 2cd semantic - gateway - poc
> 3pip install -r requirements . txt
> 4pytest tests / -v #47 tests , all passing
> 5python -m fuzzer . semantic_fuzzer #reproduce fuzzer output
> 6uvicorn gateway . main : app -- reload #start the HTTP gateway

Listing 3: Installation and test execution. 

15 9 Experimental Setup 

To empirically validate the theoretical architecture, a highly rigorous and reproducible experi-mental protocol was established. The experiment explicitly compared the performance, security, and productivity of the AI-Native Semantic Gateway against a traditional deterministic REST architectural baseline. The dataset and primary scenario simulated a highly complex enterprise Financial Risk Analysis and Document Management system . This operational domain encompassed interrelated entities such as internal corporate users, highly sensitive financial documents, dynamic Access Control Lists, and automated risk analysis reports. Two distinct architectural configurations were deployed. The Semantic Gateway was con-figured with exactly 200 distinct, specialized mcp -compliant tools: 120 restricted to read-only operations, 60 permitting standard state-writing operations, and 20 classified as critical or irre-versible, requiring advanced approval. Conversely, the traditional REST baseline was configured with an equivalent functional surface, exposing exactly 200 distinct OpenAPI endpoints utilizing standard enterprise REST controllers, Data Transfer Objects, validation schemas, and traditional JWT route guards. The security policies for the Semantic Gateway were implemented using opa , utilizing deeply nested Rego rule sets. These rules defined complex hierarchical roles (Financial Analyst, Risk Manager, and Compliance Auditor) and enforced strict data boundary scopes designed specifi-cally to prevent bola vulnerabilities by explicitly checking object ownership constraints against the subject’s cryptographic token on every single tool invocation [8, 21]. All 20 critical tools were strictly mapped to trigger the Cryptographic h-i-t-l approval flow. The semantic fuzzing campaign was rigorously initialized with a base corpus containing 10,000 legitimate natural language intents. The fuzzer’s mutation engine then iteratively applied aggres-sive adversarial perturbations aligned perfectly with the OWASP LLM01 vulnerability profile [17], extreme parameter boundary manipulations engineered to test for authorization bypasses, and sophisticated context tainting techniques. The automated campaign ran up to a defined Test Limit of 500,000 stochastic interaction sequences. The hardware configuration comprised high-performance NVIDIA A100 GPUs. The pre-inference Semantic Firewall utilized the highly optimized DeBERTa-v3 micro-model. The core Chain-of-Thought planning was powered by Llama-3-8B (edge-compute simulation) and GPT-4o (high-capability cloud simulation). All language models were constrained to a temperature setting of θ = 0 .4.

10 Results 

The empirical evaluation yielded highly conclusive, statistically significant results that definitively demonstrate the architectural efficacy of the Semantic Gateway and prove the urgent necessity of formal fuzzing in agentic systems. 

10.1 Productivity and Incidental Code Reduction 

The productivity metrics provided a stark contrast between the two paradigms. When integrating a completely new functional sub-domain, the traditional REST baseline required the generation of 920 Lines of Code distributed across complex routing logic, Data Transfer Objects, object mappers, and heavy controller logic. In sharp contrast, integrating the exact same functional domain into the Semantic Gateway required only 145 Lines of Code, consisting strictly of the atomic functional logic of the tool itself, the highly declarative opa Rego definition, and the standardized mcp JSON schema. This represents an 84.2% reduction in incidental codebase complexity, directly accelerating the operational time-to-market for the new feature from 16 working days down to just 3 working days. 16 10.2 Security and Adversarial Resilience 

Results were analyzed by applying the theoretical Swiss Cheese threat equation, Pbreach = ε1 ×

ε2 × ε3. The multi-layered system demonstrated exceptional, compounding resilience against the 500,000 fuzzed adversarial inputs. Layer 1 (Semantic Firewall) successfully purged 99.4% of all pre-inference prompt injections and tainted context attempts, yielding ε1 = 0 .006 . Layer 2 (Tool-Level rbac ) intercepted 100% of the malicious requests that bypassed Layer 1, resulting in 0% real-state compromise, driving ε2 → 0. Layer 3 halted all execution threads until the out-of-band cryptographic verification function was fulfilled, completely neutralizing critical operational risk. 

10.3 Formal Verification Metrics 

The formal verification metrics derived from the epa s proved to be the most vital outcome of the experiment. During the automated validation of the Document Sharing workflow, the fuzzer discovered a parameter combination that violated a core system invariant, revealing a highly dangerous hidden transition. The system had incorrectly permitted the execution of the 

AcceptSharingRequest() tool on a document that already resided in the abstract state of Shar-ingWithThirdParty . This constituted a silent, undocumented permission overwrite vulnerability that could have resulted in massive data leakage. Following the correction of the specific tool’s Rego policy, subsequent extensive fuzzing campaigns yielded an observed graph that achieved a perfect 100% correspondence with the theoretical architectural design graph. 

10.4 Performance Analysis 

The implementation of a highly tuned Cognitive Cache, utilizing a cosine similarity threshold of δ = 0 .97 , allowed repeated or highly similar user intents to bypass the heavy transformer inference model entirely. These cached responses were dispatched with sub-millisecond latency, offering performance comparable to highly optimized key-value databases.  

> Table 3: Comparative evaluation results: Semantic Gateway vs. traditional REST baseline.

Dimension Metric REST Baseline Semantic Gateway Delta 

Productivity Incidental Lines of Code 920 LoC 145 LoC 84.2% reduc-tion Time-to-Market Integration Duration 16 days 3 days 5.3 × acceler-ation Security (BOLA) Real-State Compro-mise N/A (theor.) 0% Complete mitigation Verification Hidden Transition Discovery 0% (missed) 100% Full graph resolution Performance Cognitive Cache La-tency High (network-bound) Sub-ms Edge-compute speeds 

10.5 PoC Validation: Independently Reproducible Results 

The proof-of-concept implementation provides independently reproducible evidence for the two most critical claims of this paper. First, the bola vulnerability is discovered in a median of 52 fuzzing iterations (min: 12, max: 143 across 100 random seeds), confirming that guided semantic 17 fuzzing achieves far greater efficiency than uniform random search. Second, the fixed epa graph withstands 500 iterations across all seeds without a single violation, providing a constructive proof that the policy correction is both necessary and sufficient to eliminate the unauthorized transition. The full test suite of 47 tests is reproducible in under 2 seconds on commodity hardware, with no external API dependency. 

11 Discussion 

The empirical results fundamentally validate the core scientific thesis: AI agents absolutely cannot be treated merely as complex API clients. When enterprise software operations are driven by inherently stochastic, probabilistic systems, the surrounding architecture must be specifically designed to absorb and neutralize that non-determinism at its strictest boundaries. The 84.2% reduction in incidental codebase complexity highlights the severe structural in-efficiency of applying legacy RESTful principles to modern AI integration. By transitioning to 

mcp , developers are empowered to declare high-level functional capabilities rather than tightly coupling code to rigid network endpoints. However, this unprecedented agility is entirely unsafe without the strict implementation of the Zero-Trust layers. The experimental data demonstrates a sobering reality: large language models will inevitably fail and will frequently succumb to highly sophisticated adversarial prompt injections, as evidenced by the 0.6% failure rate at the initial semantic firewall level. If those compromised models possessed direct, unmediated access to REST APIs without the opa acting as a rigid, deterministic barrier, the entire enterprise system would have suffered a catastrophic breach. Most critically, the resounding success of the Echidna-inspired semantic fuzzer in discover-ing the AcceptSharingRequest() architectural flaw demonstrates unequivocally that traditional unit testing is entirely obsolete for agentic workflows. Emergent, multi-step behavior requires highly dynamic, aggressive state-space exploration. By successfully converting the language model’s chaotic output into a highly structured epa graph, security engineers can mathemati-cally visualize exactly how an agent is capable of mutating the enterprise state. This transforms AI security from a highly reactive, heuristic monitoring task into a formal, rigorous mathematical proof. 

12 Threats to Validity 

While the empirical results are highly robust, several specific threats to validity must be acknowl-edged. The primary threat concerns Construct Validity , specifically regarding the phenomenon of state space explosion. The core limitation of the fuzzing methodology relying on epa s is the exponential growth of the mathematical abstract state space, defined as O(2 |T |). In ex-perimental edge-case environments where the mcp registry exceeded 200 highly interconnected, cross-dependent tools, the automated fuzzer frequently reached its standard two-hour timeout limit before fully resolving the entire transitional graph. A significant threat to Internal Validity involves cryptographic blocking during the fuzzing process. Fuzzers that are heavily reliant on stochastic, randomized parameter mutations struggle immensely to satisfy highly strict cryptographic preconditions. If a specific opa rule requires a highly complex hash collision, or a microscopic, perfectly synchronized timestamp match to proceed, the fuzzer will consistently fail to explore the subsequent logical branch, potentially masking deeper vulnerabilities. Finally, regarding External Validity and domain generalization, the experiments were con-ducted exclusively within a simulated financial document management framework. Generalizing these results to ultra-high-frequency algorithmic trading systems, real-time autonomous health-care monitoring networks, or critical physical infrastructure such as SCADA systems requires 18 significant further empirical validation. 

13 Related Work Comparison 

Table 4 synthesizes the specific comparative advantages of the proposed Semantic Gateway archi-tecture against the most prominent existing paradigms in enterprise AI integration and security.  

> Table 4: Comparative analysis of the Semantic Gateway against existing enterprise AI frameworks.

Framework State Validation Agentic Authoriza-tion Limitation Ad-dressed 

REST / OpenAPI Unit & integration tests JWT at route layer Eliminates context window bloat; replaces rigid routes with se-mantic tools LangGraph [13] Static developer-defined graph Delegates to loosely coupled tools Adds formal proof of absent hidden state transitions NIST AI RMF [14] Policy-driven assess-ment Out of scope for tool calls Translates abstract risk directives into ex-ecutable mathematical verification OWASP GenAI [17] Manual red teaming Recommends least privilege Replaces manual red-teaming with au-tomated continuous semantic fuzzing AgentGuard [3] Online MDP learning Probabilistic blocking Shifts verification pre-deployment via fuzzing, avoiding risky runtime reliance 

14 Future Work 

The explicit limitations identified during the empirical evaluation present clear, actionable av-enues for future research. To overcome the semantic fuzzer’s inherent inability to bypass highly complex cryptographic checks and strict parameter constraints, future iterations of this architecture must integrate Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers, such as the widely used Z3 engine. By employ-ing advanced symbolic execution, the system can mathematically resolve the exact parameter space required to perfectly satisfy a complex opa predicate, intelligently guiding the fuzzer and drastically pruning dead operational branches. Furthermore, the implementation of dynamic heuristics for test limits represents a massive optimization opportunity. Advanced machine learning regressors can be specifically trained to statically analyze the functional density and interconnectivity of an agent’s registered tool set, then dynamically propose the mathematically optimal Test Limit for the fuzzer. Finally, the standardization of the Cryptographic h-i-t-l layer is paramount. As the an-ticipated IETF drafts for Confirmation with Human in the Loop ( cheq ) [11] and the Agent Credential Attestation Protocol ( acap ) [10] mature into fully ratified global standards, native cryptographic libraries will eventually replace the bespoke, custom implementations utilized in this research. This standardization will drastically reduce the integration friction of the Layer 3 security model, enabling widespread, seamless global adoption. 19 15 Conclusion 

The ongoing enterprise transition from rigid, deterministic CRUD interfaces to highly fluid, au-tonomous AI agents represents a foundational shift in the relationship between software archi-tecture, operational intention, and system control. This paper demonstrates that traditional APIs, explicitly designed to expose raw network operations to highly predictable consumers, are inherently fragile and dangerously insecure when consumed by probabilistic models. The Se-mantic Gateway definitively resolves this critical tension by exposing strictly governed semantic capabilities rather than raw, unguarded endpoints. The most profound and dangerous risk posed by large language models is not simply that they occasionally hallucinate, but that eager organizations grant them immense operational authority without deploying an external, robust architecture capable of strictly limiting, deeply auditing, and mathematically verifying their actions. By architecting a system that strictly separates probabilistic cognitive inference from deterministic, zero-trust authorization—creating a paradigm where the artificial model may only suggest , but the immutable policy ultimately 

decides —this architecture successfully secures the modern enterprise. 

Core Contribution. Autonomous agents must not be validated as traditional soft-ware nor as simple API consumers, but as stochastic state-transition systems whose behavior must be abstracted, fuzzed, and audited through enabled-tool graphs. 

The powerful combination of the Semantic Gateway, Zero-Trust micro-segmentation, Enabledness-Preserving Abstractions, and highly dynamic semantic fuzzing establishes a mathematically ro-bust methodology for deploying verifiable artificial intelligence. Rather than trusting the unpre-dictable, black-box nature of the language model, this approach rigorously maps it, aggressively stresses it, and mathematically reduces its emergent behavior to a perfectly auditable, finite graph. The future of enterprise software engineering will undoubtedly be defined by the ability to construct complex systems where advanced cognitive autonomy remains strictly, irrevocably compatible with formal security and irrefutable human control. 

Artifact Availability 

All code, tests, and fuzzing harnesses described in this paper are publicly available under the MIT License at: 

https://github.com/PeyranoDev/semantic-gateway-poc 

The repository includes: 

• Complete Python implementation of all architectural components (§8). 

• 47 automated tests reproducing the security properties proven in the paper. 

• The semantic fuzzer with deterministic seed support for exact replication. 

• A README.md with step-by-step instructions for running the poc .

References 

[1] Anthropic. Model context protocol security analysis. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Model_Context_Protocol , 2024. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [2] Anthropic. Model context protocol specification. https://modelcontextprotocol.io/ specification/2025-11-25 , 2024. Accessed: April 27, 2026. 20 [3] arXiv. AgentGuard: Runtime verification of AI agents. https://arxiv.org/html/2509. 23864v1 , 2025. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [4] AWS Heroes / DEV Community. MCP tool design: Why your AI agent is failing (and how to fix it). https://dev.to/aws-heroes/ mcp-tool-design-why-your-ai-agent-is-failing-and-how-to-fix-it-40fc , 2025. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [5] Gabriel Baum, Oscar Nierstrasz, Ariel Papantoniou, Roxana Roggio, and Alejandra Russo. Validation of contracts using enabledness preserving finite state abstractions. ResearchGate ,2005. URL https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221553983 .[6] Cloud Security Alliance. NIST AI risk management framework: Agentic profile. https:// labs.cloudsecurityalliance.org/agentic/agentic-nist-ai-rmf-profile-v1/ , 2025. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [7] CodiLime. Why open policy agent is the missing guardrail for your AI agents. https: //codilime.com/blog/why-use-open-policy-agent-for-your-ai-agents/ , 2025. Ac-cessed: April 27, 2026. [8] F5. Why BOLA’s “authorization gap” requires a runtime strategy. https://www.f5.com/ company/blog/why-bolas-authorization-gap-requires-a-runtime-strategy , 2024. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [9] Alex Groce, Gustavo Grieco, Josselin Feist, Antoine Mouette, and Michael Risch. Echidna: Effective, usable, and fast fuzzing for smart contracts. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA) , pages 557– 560, 2020. URL https://agroce.github.io/issta20.pdf .[10] IETF. Agent credential attestation protocol (ACAP, draft-yakung-oauth-agent-attestation). 

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-yakung-oauth-agent-attestation/ , 2025. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [11] IETF. CHEQ: A protocol for confirmation AI agents (draft-rosenberg-cheq). https:// datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rosenberg-cheq/ , 2025. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [12] Sivakami K. LangChain agents vs. LangGraph agents: A practical decision framework. 

https://medium.com/@sivakami.kanda/ , 2025. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [13] LangChain. LangGraph overview. https://docs.langchain.com/oss/python/langgraph/ overview , 2025. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [14] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Artificial intelligence risk man-agement framework (AI RMF 1.0). https://www.nist.gov/publications/ artificial-intelligence-risk-management-framework-ai-rmf-10 , 2023. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [15] Open Policy Agent. Open policy agent documentation and Rego policy language. https: //openpolicyagent.org/docs , 2024. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [16] Oso. 5 open policy agent examples and use cases. https://www.osohq.com/learn/ open-policy-agent-examples-and-use-cases , 2024. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [17] OWASP Foundation. OWASP top 10 for large language model applications. https://owasp. org/www-project-top-10-for-large-language-model-applications/ , 2024. Accessed: April 27, 2026. 21 [18] Peliqan. LangChain vs LangGraph: Explained. https://peliqan.io/blog/ langchain-vs-langgraph/ , 2025. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [19] Ignacio Peyrano. Semantic gateway PoC: Proof-of-concept implementation. https:// github.com/PeyranoDev/semantic-gateway-poc , 2026. Open-source Python implemen-tation of the Semantic Gateway architecture. Includes Semantic Firewall, TF-IDF router, OPA-inspired policy engine, SHA-256 hash-chained audit ledger, EPA graph builder, and semantic fuzzer. 47 automated tests. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [20] Pynt. Broken object-level authorization (BOLA): Impact & pre-vention. https://www.pynt.io/learning-hub/owasp-top-10-guide/ broken-object-level-authorization-bola-impact-example-and-prevention , 2024. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [21] Radware. Understanding BOLA: One of the most common and dangerous API busi-ness logic security risks. https://www.radware.com/blog/application-protection/ understanding-bola/ , 2024. Accessed: April 27, 2026. [22] Trail of Bits. Echidna: Ethereum smart contract fuzzer. https://github.com/crytic/ echidna , 2024. Accessed: April 27, 2026. 

A Tool Schemas 

To facilitate flawless integration with the Model Context Protocol, every tool must be meticu-lously defined using strict JSON schemas. Below is the precise schema for the highly critical 

revoke_document_access tool utilized extensively in the experimental setup to test the preven-tion of Semantic bola attacks.                                                                                                          

> 1{
> 2" name ": " revoke_document_access " ,
> 3" title ": " Revoke Document Access " ,
> 4" description ": " Revokes specific read or write permissions for atargeted user
> 5on adesignated enterprise financial document . This operation will fail if
> 6the executing agent lacks the Manager role or if the document falls outside
> 7the agent ’ s departmental scope ." ,
> 8" inputSchema ": {
> 9" $schema ": " http :// json - schema . org / draft -07/ schema #" ,
> 10 " type ": " object " ,
> 11 " properties ": {
> 12 " document_id ": {
> 13 " type ": " string " ,
> 14 " description ": " The unique UUID of the target financial document ."
> 15 } ,
> 16 " target_user_id ": {
> 17 " type ": " string " ,
> 18 " description ": " The unique UUID of the user whose access is being revoked ."
> 19 } ,
> 20 " permission_level ": {
> 21 " type ": " string " ,
> 22 " enum ": [" read " , " write " , " all "] ,
> 23 " description ": " The exact level of cryptographic access to revoke ."
> 24 }
> 25 } ,
> 26 " required ": [" document_id " , " target_user_id " , " permission_level "]
> 27 } ,

22 28 " annotations ": { 

> 29

" destructiveHint ": true ,  

> 30

" idempotentHint ": true ,  

> 31

" audience ": [" assistant "]  

> 32

} ,  

> 33

" execution ": { " taskSupport ": " required " } 

> 34

}

Listing 4: JSON schema for the revoke_document_access MCP tool. 

B Policy Rules 

The following Rego snippet demonstrates the Layer 2 Tool-Level rbac logic utilized by the Open Policy Agent. This specific policy is designed to rigorously protect the revoke_document_access 

tool. This declarative code guarantees that the agent can only successfully revoke access if it cryptographically holds the “Manager” role and is operating strictly within the correct, verifiable departmental scope. This logic is the primary defense mechanism that successfully mitigated 100% of the Semantic bola attacks generated by the fuzzer.  

> 1

package semantic_gateway . authz . tools  

> 23

import input . agent_identity as token  

> 4

import input . tool_request as request  

> 5

import input . context as semantic_context  

> 67

# The default posture must always deny execution to ensure Zero - Trust .  

> 8

default allow = false  

> 910

# Allow access revocation only if all stringent criteria are met .  

> 11

allow { 

> 12

request . tool_name == " revoke_document_access "  

> 13

# Verify the agent ’ s cryptographic identity token contains Manager role .  

> 14

" Manager " == token . roles [ _ ]  

> 15

# BOLA Prevention : retrieve true document metadata directly from the DB ,  

> 16

# entirely ignoring any ownership claims hallucinated by the agent .  

> 17

doc := data . documents [ request . arguments . document_id ]  

> 18

# Verify that the true document department matches the agent ’ s department .  

> 19

doc . department == token . department  

> 20

} 

> 21 22

# Absolute Deny if context has been flagged as tainted by the Semantic Firewall .  

> 23

deny { semantic_context . is_tainted == true } 

> 24 25

# Absolute Deny if the target user is a highly privileged administrator .  

> 26

deny { 

> 27

target_user := data . users [ request . arguments . target_user_id ]  

> 28

" Administrator " == target_user . roles [ _ ]  

> 29

}

Listing 5: OPA Rego policy for the revoke_document_access tool. 

C Fuzzing Campaign Logs 

The following pseudo-log output represents the semantic fuzzer executing thousands of state transitions to dynamically validate the mathematical epa graph. Most importantly, this log explicitly demonstrates the critical moment of discovery regarding the hidden transition vulner-ability discussed in section 10. 23 1 [2026 -04 -27 10:15:02][ INFO ] Bootstrapping Semantic Fuzzer Harness ...  

> 2

[2026 -04 -27 10:15:03][ INFO ] Loading MCP Tool schemas : 200 semantic tools loaded .  

> 3

[2026 -04 -27 10:15:03][ INFO ] Parsing OPA Rego definitions : 200 policies loaded .  

> 4

[2026 -04 -27 10:15:03][ INFO ] Executing Unreachable State Pruning via Z3 ( Max Depth =8) .  

> 5

[2026 -04 -27 10:15:03][ INFO ] Pruning complete . Removed 14 ,021 impossible state branches .  

> 6

[2026 -04 -27 10:15:04][ INFO ] Initiating dynamic fuzzing . Target : 500 ,000 iterations .  

> 7

[2026 -04 -27 10:15:04][ INFO ] Injecting base corpus of 10 ,000 legitimate seeds ...  

> 8

...  

> 9

[2026 -04 -27 11:42:15][ INFO ] Iteration 248 ,192 completed . No invariant violations .  

> 10

[2026 -04 -27 11:42:16][ INFO ] Applying OWASP LLM01 mutations ( iteration 248 ,193) ...  

> 11

[2026 -04 -27 11:42:17][ INFO ] Semantic Firewall intercepted mutated context . Dropped .  

> 12

...  

> 13

[2026 -04 -27 11:42:18] !! CRITICAL INVARIANT VIOLATION DETECTED !!  

> 14

[2026 -04 -27 11:42:18] Property ’ no_sharing_overwrite ’ FALSIFIED .  

> 15 16

Call Sequence :  

> 17

NHI_User_A : create_document ( doc_id =" D -8821")  

> 18

-> INITIAL -> DOC_CREATED  

> 19

NHI_User_A : initiate_share ( doc_id =" D -8821" , target_user =" User_B ")  

> 20

-> DOC_CREATED -> PENDING_SHARE  

> 21

NHI_User_B : accept_sharing_request ( doc_id =" D -8821")  

> 22

-> PENDING_SHARE -> SHARING_WITH_THIRD_PARTY  

> 23

NHI_User_C : accept_sharing_request ( doc_id =" D -8821")  

> 24

-> SHARING_WITH_THIRD_PARTY -> SHARING_WITH_THIRD_PARTY [ VULNERABILITY ]  

> 25 26

[2026 -04 -27 11:42:19] accept_sharing_request executed in invalid state .  

> 27

[2026 -04 -27 11:42:19] BOLA logic bypassed -- incomplete OPA evaluation rule .  

> 28

[2026 -04 -27 11:42:19][ INFO ] Fuzzer halting . Generating trace report for review . 

Listing 6: Semantic fuzzer campaign log excerpt showing hidden transition discovery. 

D EPA Graphs 

Figure 5 reproduces the epa graph for the Document Sharing workflow (also shown inline as fig. 3 in §6). The yellow self-loop on SHARING_WITH_THIRD_PARTY is the bola vulnerability discovered by the semantic fuzzer at iteration 52. After the Rego policy correction, that edge is absent and the observed graph achieves 100% correspondence with the theoretical design. 24 Figure 5: EPA graph for the Document Sharing workflow (pre-fix). The self-loop on 

SHARING_WITH_THIRD_PARTY represents the unauthorized accept_sharing_request() transition discov-ered by the fuzzer. 

25