Title: From Stateless Queries to Autonomous Actions: A Layered Security Framework for Agentic AI Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23338v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 00:38:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
> 1

# From Stateless Queries to Autonomous Actions: A Layered Security Framework for Agentic AI Systems 

Kexin Chu 

Abstract —Agentic AI systems face security challenges that stateless large language models do not. They plan across extended horizons, maintain persistent memory, invoke external tools, and coordinate with peer agents. Existing security analyses organize threats by attack type (prompt injection, jailbreaking), but provide no principled model of which architectural component is vulnerable or over what timescale the threat manifests. This paper makes five contributions. First, we introduce the Layered Attack Surface Model (LASM), a seven-layer framework that maps threats to distinct architectural components: Foundation , Cognitive ,

Memory , Tool Execution , Multi-Agent Coordination , Ecosystem , and 

Governance , the accountability and observability layer that spans the stack analogously to the network management plane. Second, we introduce attack temporality as an orthogonal analytical dimension with four classes: Instantaneous (T1), Session-Persistent (T2), Cross-Session Cumulative (T3), and Sub-Session-Stack, Non-Session-Bounded (T4). Third, through a systematic review of 94 papers (2021–2025), we show that the most dangerous emerging threats concentrate at the intersection of high-layer attacks (L5– L7) and slow-burn temporality (T3–T4): covert agent collusion, long-term memory poisoning, MCP supply-chain compromise, and alignment failure that manifests as an insider threat with no external adversary. Only 8 of 120 paper-cell assignments (7%) fall in this zone. Fourth, we propose a cross-layer defense taxonomy spanning all seven LASM layers and all four temporality classes, exposing which threat classes existing defenses leave unaddressed. Fifth, we survey evaluation benchmarks, identify five research gaps in the under-studied high-layer, slow-burn zone, and argue that agentic security must be treated as a distributed systems 

problem embedded in an adversarial ecosystem. 

Index Terms —AI agents, agentic systems, large language models, security, prompt injection, multi-agent systems, supply chain attacks, memory poisoning, alignment, trustworthy AI. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# THE shift from querying a language model to deploying an 

agentic AI system is more than an incremental capability upgrade; it marks a categorical change in the security threat surface. A stateless LLM responds to a single input and produces a single output, creating a bounded, session-isolated attack surface amenable to traditional input/output filtering. An AI agent, by contrast, maintains persistent state across sessions, formulates multi-step plans, invokes privileged external tools (web browsers, code interpreters, file systems, APIs) [1]– [4], and increasingly coordinates with other autonomous agents to accomplish long-horizon tasks [5]–[9]. This shift is driven partly by the emergent capabilities that arise at 

K. Chu is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Uni-versity of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269 USA. E-mail: kexin.chu@uconn.edu. 

scale [10] and partly by new infrastructure for tool and memory integration [11]. This architectural complexity generates vulnerabilities that are emergent , compositional , and temporally extended . Security models designed for stateless systems cannot capture these properties. Consider three examples that motivate this survey:  

> •

An adversarially crafted document retrieved during a routine web search can silently corrupt an agent’s long-term memory, influencing behavior in a completely unrelated session weeks later, with no detectable anomaly at either the injection or exploitation point.  

> •

A compromised sub-agent in an enterprise multi-agent pipeline can propagate malicious intent through peer-to-peer trust relationships, compromising the entire orchestration network from a single point of entry [12].  

> •

A malicious MCP server, indistinguishable to the agent from a legitimate tool provider, can silently exfiltrate sensitive data via hidden instructions embedded in tool descriptions [13]. These threats have no direct analogues in classical LLM safety or traditional software security. The security community has responded by extending existing frameworks rather than building new ones. 

a) Limitations of Existing Work.: Recent surveys [14]– [16] have catalogued an expanding roster of attacks. However, they share structural limitations that reduce their actionability for system designers: 

(1) Type-centric, not component-centric taxonomies. 

Organizing threats by attack type (jailbreaking, injection, poisoning) conflates attacks that require different defenses at different layers. A gradient-based adversarial perturbation at the embedding level and a memory poisoning attack via a RAG document are both classified as “adversarial inputs”, yet one is mitigated at the model layer and the other at the memory management layer. A designer cannot derive where to place security controls from a type-centric taxonomy. 

(2) No temporal dimension. Existing surveys treat attacks as instantaneous events. In agentic systems, the most dangerous attacks are temporally extended: a payload injected today may execute weeks later via long-term memory, or may never trigger an explicit “attack event” at all (emergent misalignment). This temporal structure is invisible to existing taxonomies. 

(3) Coverage gap at higher layers. The literature heavily covers L1 (foundation model jailbreaking) and L4 (prompt injection), but higher-layer threats, including multi-agent collusion, ecosystem supply chain attacks, and governance 

> arXiv:2604.23338v1 [cs.CR] 25 Apr 2026 2

accountability, are severely under-studied both empirically and theoretically. 

(4) Dated coverage. Several surveys have cutoffs in 2023– 2024, predating MCP security vulnerabilities, steganographic collusion benchmarks, zero-day autonomous exploitation by agent teams, and agentic governance toolkits. 

b) Contributions.: This paper makes the following con-tributions: 1) LASM : The Layered Attack Surface Model (Section IV), a principled seven-layer decomposition of the agentic attack surface. Unlike OSI-inspired network security models, LASM accounts for the unique property of LLM-based agents: that information crosses layer boundaries in seman-tically opaque ways, enabling novel cross-layer attacks. 2) Attack Temporality (Section IV-B ): A four-class temporal dimension (T1–T4) orthogonal to LASM, revealing that the most dangerous threats are not those with highest instantaneous impact, but those with the slowest, least detectable temporal signatures. 3) Systematic Literature Survey (Section V–Section X): A review of 94 papers covering attacks, defenses, and benchmarks across all seven LASM layers through April 2025, organized by both layer and temporality. 4) Cross-Layer Defense Taxonomy (Section XI): A struc-tured taxonomy of defenses organized by the layer they protect and their temporal coverage, enabling defense-in-depth design. 5) Gap Analysis (Section XIII): Systematic identification of five under-studied high-risk zones, supported by the LASM 

× temporality coverage heatmap (Fig. 3). 

c) Scope.: We cover security challenges arising from or enabled by LLM-based agentic AI architecture. We explicitly exclude: (a) static LLM safety (bias, toxicity) for non-agentic models; (b) classical adversarial ML against vision/tabular models; (c) AI misuse by humans (malware authoring, phishing automation), which is addressed by a separate literature; and (d) physical security of hardware infrastructure. We include autonomous vulnerability exploitation (Section VII) because it characterizes the offensive capability surface that agentic architecture introduces: understanding this capability is prerequisite to designing appropriate authorization and containment controls. 

d) Paper Organization.: Section II describes our survey methodology. Section III reviews agent architectures. Section IV introduces LASM and attack temporality. Section V–Section X survey each layer. Section XI presents the cross-layer de-fense taxonomy. Section XII surveys evaluation benchmarks. Section XIII identifies research gaps. Section XIV presents open challenges. Section XV compares with existing surveys. Section XVI concludes. II. S URVEY METHODOLOGY 

This survey follows a systematic literature review protocol inspired by PRISMA [17] guidelines for computing literature reviews. Fig. 1 shows the temporal distribution of retained papers. 

A. Search Strategy 

Four major databases were searched: IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital Library, arXiv (cs.CR, cs.AI, cs.LG), and Google Scholar. Forward/backward citation tracing was additionally performed from three seed papers [5], [14], [18]. Search terms combined agent-related terms × security-related terms: 

Agent terms: “AI agent”, “LLM agent”, “autonomous agent”, “multi-agent”, “agentic AI”, “tool-augmented LLM” 

Security terms: “security”, “attack”, “adversarial”, “prompt injection”, “jailbreak”, “poisoning”, “safety”, “trust”, “vulnera-bility” The search covered January 2021 to April 2025. 

B. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria Inclusion: (1a) Peer-reviewed papers at top venues (IEEE S&P, CCS, USENIX Security, NeurIPS, ICML, ICLR, ACL, EMNLP, ACM CCS, NDSS) are included regardless of citation count; (1b) arXiv and non-top-tier preprints require ≥20 citations for papers through December 2024; for January– April 2025 preprints the citation threshold was not applied due to insufficient publication time, and inclusion required a direct topical contribution to an identified gap area; (2) papers specifically addressing security of LLM-based agent systems; (3) papers presenting attacks, defenses, or evaluation frameworks. 

Exclusion: (1) Papers on LLM safety without agentic context; (2) classical adversarial ML on non-LLM models; (3) position papers without technical contributions; (4) duplicate publications. 

C. Screening and Statistics 

Table I reports the screening process. The initial database search retrieved 1,247 records; after deduplication and a title/abstract pass, 259 papers proceeded to full-text review. The final corpus of 94 papers comprises: 31 on attacks (L1– L4), 18 on multi-agent and ecosystem attacks (L5–L6), 12 on governance and alignment (L7), 15 on defenses, 11 on benchmarks and evaluation, and 7 comprehensive surveys. We acknowledge that this corpus covers the most visible work within these search and inclusion criteria but cannot be exhaustive in a field growing at this rate. 

Layer and temporality coding. Each retained paper was independently coded by the first author into one or more 

(layer , temporality ) cells using the following decision rules. 

Layer assignment : a paper is assigned to Li if its primary technical contribution (attack, defense, or benchmark) targets the trust boundary or attack surface defined for Li in Section IV; papers addressing multiple layers are coded in each relevant cell. Temporality assignment : a paper is assigned to Tk if the attack or defense it studies manifests in the time window defined for Tk (T1: within one inference call; T2: within one session; T3: across sessions; T4: sub-session-stack or trigger-conditioned). A paper is assigned to T3 only if it explicitly involves cross-session state persistence via a memory-layer write; a paper is assigned to T4 only if the payload resides in model weights or training data (T4b) or if there is no discrete 3

payload at all (T4a). For papers where layer or temporality was ambiguous, we applied a conservative rule: assign to the more restrictive (lower-layer, faster-temporality) category. 

Coding distribution. The 120 paper-cell assignments in Table IV come from 94 papers, giving a mean of 1.28 cells per paper. Cell-level totals in Table IV are the primary data; representative citations for all sparse cells ( ≤3 papers) appear in Table V for independent verification. Papers assigned to multiple cells are those covering cross-layer attack chains or comprehensive defense systems. Inter-rater reliability was not formally assessed; this limitation is discussed in Section XVI. 

2025 inclusion threshold. Of the 22 papers from January– April 2025, 14 met the ≥20 citation threshold and were included unconditionally. The remaining 8 were admitted under the gap-area exception: all 8 address the under-studied zone 

{L5–L7} × { T 3–T 4} identified during coding as having ≤3papers per cell. Excluding these 8 papers does not change the main coverage gap finding; it increases the under-studied cell counts in Table IV by at most 1 per cell. 

Note on total references. The bibliography contains 144 entries , of which 94 are primary security papers that passed PRISMA screening. The remaining 50 entries are background and foundational references: LLM and agent architectures, classical computer security principles, AI safety and alignment theory, and governance documents. These are cited in the introduction, background (Section III), and defense taxonomy sections to contextualize the survey findings but were not included in the coverage statistics of Table I. TABLE I: Literature screening process (PRISMA-inspired).                

> Stage Records Excl.
> Retrieved (4 databases) 1,247 —IEEE Xplore 243 ACM DL 187 arXiv (cs.CR/AI/LG) 621 Google Scholar 196 After deduplication 843 404 After title/abstract screen 259 584
> (non-agentic; non-security; position)
> After full-text assessment 94 165
> (no contribution; out of scope)
> Final corpus 94

Fig. 1 shows the temporal distribution, confirming an exponential publication growth trend beginning in 2023. III. B ACKGROUND : A NATOMY OF AN AI A GENT 

A. Core Architectural Components 

> Definition: AI Agent

An AI agent is an autonomous computational system built upon a foundation language model that: (a) perceives multi-modal inputs from its environment, (b) maintains state across multiple interaction turns, (c) formulates and executes goal-directed plans through sequences of actions, and (d) modifies its environment via external tool invocations or communication with peer agents [8].     

> 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025*
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> Year
> Number of Papers
> Publication Trend (94 surveyed papers)
> *Jan–Apr. 2025 only

Fig. 1: Publication trend of surveyed papers by year. The near-doubling each year reflects the rapid growth of agentic AI deployment and the corresponding security community response. The 2025 bar (Jan–Apr only) includes papers below the citation threshold that directly address identified gap areas; the citation threshold was not applied to 2025 work due to insufficient publication time. We identify six core architectural components (Fig. 2), each introducing distinct security concerns: 

(1) Foundation Model. A large pretrained language model [19]–[21] that serves as the reasoning engine [22]– [25]. Safety properties acquired through RLHF [26]–[28] or Constitutional AI [29] are necessary but insufficient for agentic deployment, as they are trained on single-turn interaction data [30]. 

(2) Planning and Reasoning Module. Translates high-level goals into action sequences via architectures including ReAct [5], chain-of-thought [31], and tree-of-thought search. Multi-step planning creates a surface for cumulative goal drift: small perturbations at each reasoning step can compound into large behavioral deviations. 

(3) Memory System. Stores agent state across interactions via four mechanisms: (a) in-context memory (the active con-versation window), (b) external short-term memory (session-scoped vector stores), (c) external long-term memory (persistent episodic/semantic stores), and (d) procedural memory (learned tool-use patterns) [32]. 

(4) Tool Execution Layer. Enables agents to invoke external capabilities: web browsers, code interpreters, databases, file systems, and third-party APIs. Each tool invocation constitutes a real-world side effect that may be irreversible, and tool outputs are typically injected back into the agent’s context without explicit trust marking. 

(5) Multi-Agent Interface. Mechanisms for inter-agent communication, delegation, and result aggregation. Introduces trust-hierarchy questions absent in single-agent systems: when should an agent trust instructions from a peer versus an orchestrator? 

(6) Orchestration and Environment. The runtime infras-tructure mediates all agent–world interactions. It encompasses conversation frameworks, MCP servers, API gateways, and container runtimes. 

B. The Principal Hierarchy and Trust Inversion 

A fundamental security property of agent systems, often under-specified in practice, is the principal hierarchy : the 4Foundation Model (L1) Planning & Reasoning (L2) Memory System (L3) Tool Execution (L4) Multi-Agent Interface (L5) Orchestration Env. (L6/L7) Principal Hierarchy   

> Dev ≻Op ≻User
> ≻Env (untrusted) tool call env. input

Fig. 2: AI agent architecture mapped to LASM layers. The dashed red arrow marks principal trust inversion : tool outputs (environment inputs) flow back into the planning layer as if authoritative, despite being the least trusted principal. This structural flaw underlies most L4 attacks. ordered chain of principals whose instructions the agent is expected to follow. 

> Definition: Principal Hierarchy

A principal hierarchy P = ( p1 ≻ p2 ≻ · · · ≻ pn) is a strict ordering of instruction sources, where pi ≻ pj

means instructions from pi should take precedence over instructions from pj in cases of conflict. In typical deployments: Developer ≻ Operator ≻ User ≻

Environment [33]. Most agent implementations implicitly treat environment inputs as high-trust , despite the environment being the least trusted principal in the chain [18]. We term this 

principal trust inversion : the systematic failure to enforce the principal hierarchy at the agent–environment boundary. It is the root cause of indirect prompt injection and tool-based manipulation attacks (Section VII). 

C. Formal Threat Model 

We model the security of an agent system A with respect to an adversary D characterized by four dimensions:  

> •

Position : External (no system access; can inject content into the information environment), Semi-trusted principal 

(legitimate but bounded access; malicious user), or Supply-chain (can compromise upstream components: models, tools, frameworks).  

> •

Knowledge : Black-box (observable input/output only), 

Gray-box (knows architecture but not weights), or White-box (full access).  

> •

Goal : Confidentiality (extract private data), Integrity (alter agent behavior), or Availability (disrupt agent operation).  

> •

Persistence : One-shot (single interaction) or Persistent 

(sustained, multi-session campaign). This threat model is richer than those used in most prior surveys, which typically characterize adversaries only by goal type. IV. T HE LAYERED ATTACK SURFACE MODEL 

A. Design Rationale 

Security analysis benefits from layered reference models. The OSI model enabled network security reasoning by making each layer’s trust boundaries, data formats, and security respon-sibilities explicit. We propose an analogous decomposition for agentic AI. The LASM insight is that agent components have: (1) Different trust boundaries : The foundation model trusts the system prompt; the tool layer trusts function call returns; the memory layer trusts retrieval results. (2) Different data semantics : L1 processes tokens; L3 pro-cesses embeddings; L4 processes structured API responses. Attacks that cross these semantic boundaries bypass layer-specific detectors on both sides. (3) Different defense leverage points : Input sanitization at L4 provides no protection against L1 gradient-based adversarial examples, and vice versa. 

a) Layer Decomposition Criterion.: Two attack surfaces belong to distinct layers if and only if: (1) they present independent trust boundaries, meaning an attack exploiting one boundary cannot be detected at the other without additional instrumentation, and (2) they admit different defense leverage points, so controls effective at one layer are structurally inapplicable at the other. The criterion operates on attack surface representations , the domain in which attacks are formulated and defenses must operate, rather than on neural or computational substrate. This distinction is essential for L1 and L2 (see below). Applied to the other layers: an adversarial embedding vector ( R3) cannot be detected by a JSON sanitizer (R4), and vice versa. The trust graph structure among agents (R5) has no analogue in single-agent tool call semantics ( R4). L6 ecosystem artifacts (model weights, package manifests) constitute a deployment-time attack surface structurally separate from L4 runtime tool I/O. 

b) Note on L1 vs. L2: attack surface disjointness under shared weights.: In current single-LLM agents, L1 and L2 share the same neural network weights as their computational sub-strate. LASM nonetheless treats them as distinct layers because their attack surface representations are disjoint . Formally: R1

comprises trained-weight artifacts , the domain manipulated by gradient-based adversarial perturbations, backdoor poisoning, and extraction attacks. R2 comprises in-context reasoning artifacts , the live goal specification, chain-of-thought trajectory, and planning state manipulated at inference time. The distinction is not computational substrate (both layers use the same weights) but where the attack is formulated and where the defense must operate . A gradient-based adversarial suffix operates on R1 by perturbing token embeddings to exploit weight-space geometry, and is invisible to a plan verifier that inspects output action sequences in R2. Conversely, a false-premise injection into the reasoning chain operates on R2 and cannot be caught by adversarial training that hardens R1: the injected premise is semantically valid in weight space, and the weights were never trained to resist this specific in-context manipulation. An apparent tension arises from safety fine-tuning: RLHF modifies weights ( R1 operation) but changes average inference-5

time reasoning behavior ( R2 effect). This does not violate disjointness because the Proposition 1 pure-defense assumption precludes cross-layer side channels, not cross-layer effects mediated by the model itself. More precisely: safety fine-tuning is an R1 operation that shifts the marginal distribution of rea-soning outputs, but it cannot target a specific in-context trigger-conditioned reasoning manipulation. Hubinger et al. [34] demonstrate this exactly: safety fine-tuning shifts average reasoning toward alignment but leaves trigger-conditioned deceptive reasoning intact, because that deception is encoded as a context-dependent R2 pattern, not as an R1 weight anomaly that gradient-based optimization can reliably identify and remove. LASM is therefore an analytical framework for locating security controls, not an architectural blueprint requiring physically separate computational units. 

> Definition: Layered Attack Surface Model (LASM)

LASM partitions the attack surface of an AI agent system into seven ordered layers L = ( L1, L 2, . . . , L 7), where each layer Li is characterized by: (a) a distinct analytical unit Ci with an independent trust boundary Bi; (b) a unique attack surface representation Ri, the domain where attacks against Li are formulated and defenses must operate, satisfying Ri ∩ R j = ∅ for all i̸ = j; (c) a set of representative threats Ti; and (d) a set of defense leverage points Di. L7 (Governance) functions as the accountability and observability layer , capturing failures that manifest as unattributable harm from any attack at L1–L6. Like the management plane in network architectures, it spans the full stack but is modeled as a distinct security layer. Table III provides a complete summary. We describe each layer in detail in Section V–Section X. 

> Proposition 1: Defense Non-Transferability

Conditions: Let Li, L j be any two distinct LASM layers (i̸ = j) with attack surface representations Ri, Rj satisfying 

Ri ∩ R j = ∅. Let d ∈ D i be a pure layer-i defense: one whose detection signal is a deterministic function exclusively of inputs drawn from Ri, with no side-channel access to content in Rj (j̸ = i). Let a ∈ T j be an attack that introduces its payload exclusively in Rj .

Claim: ∀ d ∈ Dpure  

> i

, ∀ a ∈ Tj :Pr[ d detects or blocks a] = Pr[ baseline ], where baseline is detection probability without d.

Proof sketch: Because d reads exclusively from Ri and a

introduces its payload exclusively in Rj with Ri ∩ R j = ∅,the payload produces no observable change in Ri. The input distribution to d is therefore identical with and without a;detection probability equals the baseline. □

The pure-defense assumption is not restrictive in practice: most deployed defenses read from a single Ri by construction. A perplexity filter operates on token sequences ( R1) and cannot observe embedding vectors ( R3); a JSON sanitizer operates on structured tool returns ( R4) and cannot observe inter-agent routing ( R5). Cross-layer ensemble defenses can relax the zero-coverage bound but must be analyzed as compositions of layer-specific components, not as substitutes for per-layer controls. The implication is structural: a rational adversary will route the payload through whichever Rj has no corresponding control, so every layer without a defense is exploitable in the worst case, and defense-in-depth across all Di is a requirement even when cross-layer ensembles are deployed. 

> Proposition 2: Temporal Coverage Gap (Empirical Finding)

Let P (Li, T k) denote the number of papers in the 94-paper corpus (Section II) that primarily address layer Li under temporality class Tk, determined by the coding procedure in Section II. For the under-studied zone U = {L5, L 6, L 7} × {T3, T 4}:

X 

> (Li,T k)∈U

P (Li, T k) = 8 vs. X  

> (Li,T k)/∈U

P (Li, T k) = 112 ,

meaning under-studied cells contain 7% of all paper-cell assignments; the specific papers for each sparse cell are listed in Table V for independent verification. Moreover, attacks in U have the highest real-world impact severity (covert agent collusion, long-term memory corruption, agentic misalignment), creating an inverse correlation between research effort and threat severity that constitutes the central gap this survey addresses. 

c) Cross-Layer Attack Patterns.: Dangerous attacks often 

span multiple layers simultaneously , a property that LASM captures through its layer boundaries but type-centric tax-onomies miss. Three cross-layer patterns are worth noting: (1) L4 →L3 →L7 : An indirect prompt injection (L4) plants a memory entry (L3) that causes misattributed accountability (L7), the “temporal escalation” pattern (Section VI); (2) 

L6 →L2 : A supply-chain backdoor (L6) corrupts the planning module’s goal representation (L2) via a trigger-conditioned sleeper agent (Section V); (3) L5 →L1 : An infectious jailbreak propagates across agents (L5), each serving as a relay that overrides the next agent’s foundation-model safety constraints (L1). These cross-layer patterns are invisible to type-centric taxonomies but are naturally captured by LASM’s layer boundaries. 

d) Framework Validation: LASM Applied to Documented Incidents.: To validate that LASM produces actionable defense-placement decisions beyond what type-centric taxonomies provide, the framework is applied to two documented real-world incidents. 

Incident 1: Postmark MCP Compromise (2024–2025). Aproduction Postmark MCP server was found to inject a BCC field into email tool calls, silently exfiltrating all outgoing email content to an attacker-controlled address [35]. 

Type-centric classification: “Supply chain attack” or “prompt injection.” Both labels direct defenders toward L4 input filtering (detecting injected instructions in content) or general supply-chain hygiene. LASM classification:  

> •

Layer : L6 (Ecosystem). The attack vector is the MCP server itself, a trusted ecosystem component; the exploit 6

arrives via the tool description loaded at initialization, not via user-supplied content.  

> •

Temporality : T2 (Session-Persistent). The compromised tool description persists throughout each agent session from the moment of context initialization.  

> •

Primary defense leverage point : L6. ABOM-based prove-nance tracking with cryptographic manifest signing of MCP server descriptions would have enabled detection before initialization. L4 output filtering would not have caught this attack because the exfiltration was implemented as a legitimately formatted tool call. Without LASM, the “supply chain” label would direct defenders toward SBOM-style package verification, which does not enumerate tool description content. LASM uniquely identifies L6 as the control point and motivates the ABOM extension (Section IX). 

Incident 2: GitHub Copilot RCE via Prompt Injection in Project Files [36]. Attacker-controlled content in project files, including dependency documentation, GitHub issues, and pull request descriptions, was found to inject shell-execution instructions into GitHub Copilot’s context. When the agent processed these files during routine coding tasks such as code review or documentation generation, it executed the embedded instructions as shell commands, achieving remote code execution. 

Type-centric classification: “Supply chain attack.” This directs defenders toward package signing and registry vetting (upstream prevention). LASM classification:  

> •

Layer : L4 (Tool Execution). The exploit mechanism is principal trust inversion at the tool layer: content from project files and repository metadata, returned by file-read and code-analysis tools, is incorporated into the agent’s planning context without trust marking and executed as instructions.  

> •

Temporality : T1 (Instantaneous). The full attack chain (doc-string retrieval → instruction injection → shell execution) completes within a single code review session.  

> •

Primary defense leverage point : L4. Tool output sand-boxing and output filtering applied to tool returns would have contained the exploit even if the malicious content reached the agent’s context. Package signing reduces the probability of the malicious file being present but does not limit execution once it is present. The two incidents illustrate a key LASM property: the same high-level attack label (“supply chain”) maps to different primary layers (L6 vs. L4) with different primary defense controls (ABOM vs. tool sandboxing). A type-centric taxonomy cannot distinguish these cases; LASM does so by identifying which trust boundary is exploited. 

e) Structured Validation: LASM Defense Placement vs. OWASP LLM Top 10.: To validate LASM’s utility beyond two incidents, Table II maps five documented attacks against the OWASP LLM Top 10 [37] and MITRE ATLAS [38] classification, then derives the defense prescription from each taxonomy. The key test is whether different attacks that share an OWASP/ATLAS category require different defenses under LASM. If yes, the type-centric label causes misallocated controls : a designer who follows only OWASP/ATLAS would apply the same defense to both cases, leaving one of them uncovered. Table II demonstrates that “Prompt Injection” (LLM01) maps to three different LASM layers (L1, L3, L5) each requiring layer-specific defenses, and that “Insecure Plugin Design” (LLM07) maps to L4 and L6 with non-overlapping controls. A designer following only OWASP/ATLAS would apply input filtering and package-signing across all five cases; LASM shows that four of the five require additional controls that input-filtering and package-signing cannot provide. 

B. Attack Temporality: An Orthogonal Dimension 

> Definition: Attack Temporality

The temporality class τ (a) of an attack a characterizes the installation-to-execution gap : the elapsed time between the introduction of the attack payload and the realization of its harmful effect. For T1–T3 this gap is bounded by the session structure; for T4 the gap is not session-bounded. We define four classes based on what structural boundary contains the gap. 

T1 – Instantaneous : Gap = 0 ; payload introduction and harmful effect occur within the same inference call. All classical prompt injection and jailbreak attacks are T1. Detectable in real time; targeted by most existing defenses. 

T2 – Session-Persistent : Gap is bounded by one session; the payload persists across turns within a single session and executes before the session ends. Context manipulation attacks that hijack an ongoing planning process are T2. Detectable with session-scoped monitoring. 

T3 – Cross-Session Cumulative : Gap spans at least one session boundary; the payload is written to persistent memory in session si and exploited in a future session sj (j > i ,potentially j ≫ i). This class is uniquely dangerous because (a) the injection appears as a normal memory write, (b) the exploitation appears as a normal memory read, and (c) no single session contains evidence of both events. Detectable by cross-session memory auditing. 

T4 – Sub-Session-Stack, Non-Session-Bounded : The installation-to-execution gap is not bounded by session structure because the payload is installed at a layer below the session stack (model weights or training data) or because the gap is conditioned on an arbitrary trigger rather than a session boundary. Two sub-classes:  

> •

T4a (Drift) : No discrete payload. Harmful behavior emerges from accumulated exposure to biased environ-ments without any triggering event. The gap is infinite and open-ended; deviation accumulates continuously, detectable only through longitudinal distributional moni-toring across hundreds of sessions.  

> •

T4b (Dormant) : A discrete payload is embedded in model weights or a supply-chain component during training or fine-tuning, not via a session-layer memory write. Harmful execution is deferred until an arbitrary trigger condition fires, which may occur after thousands of 7

TABLE II: Defense placement under type-centric taxonomy vs. LASM for five documented attacks. Attacks 1–2 share OWASP category LLM07 but require different defenses; Attacks 3–5 share LLM01 but map to three distinct LASM layers. OWASP assignments follow the closest-fit interpretation of the OWASP LLM Top 10 (2023); where the official documentation does not enumerate a specific attack the assignment is the authors’ interpretation.                        

> Attack instance OWASP LLM Defense from type la-bel LASM layer LASM-guided defense Gap closed by LASM
> Postmark MCP BCC injection [35] LLM07: Inse-cure Plugin De-sign Audit npm deps; vali-date tool schemas L6 ABOM manifest hash verification before con-text init Schema validation misses BCC injection in natural-language tool descriptions; L4 out-put filtering misses legitimately formatted exfiltration calls. GitHub Copilot RCE via project files [36] LLM07: Inse-cure Plugin De-sign Audit npm deps; sign packages L4 Tool output sandboxing; principal trust marking on file-read returns Package signing prevents the malicious file’s presence but does not contain exe-cution once present; only L4 sandboxing limits blast radius if L6 fails. PoisonedRAG cross-session poisoning [39] LLM03: Train-ing Data Poi-soning Data validation at in-gestion; source verifica-tion L3 (T3) Memory consensus vali-dation; write-time prove-nance tracking LLM03 mitigations validate the initial knowledge base, not runtime memory writes during operation. The required defense is write-time provenance, not ingestion-time validation. Infectious jailbreak via agent relay [12] LLM01: Prompt Injection Per-agent safety train-ing; content classifiers L5 (T2) Inter-agent authentication; heterogeneous model families across agents A compromised agent relays a syntactically legitimate payload through its normal inter-face; per-agent classifiers cannot intercept it. GCG adversarial suf-fix [40] LLM01: Prompt Injection Perplexity-based input filter L1 Adversarial training on gradient-space perturba-tions; certified robust-ness GCG suffixes are constructed to maintain low perplexity, defeating filters; the required
> R1defense is gradient-space adversarial training, not input-text filtering.

TABLE III: The Layered Attack Surface Model (LASM): seven layers with trust boundaries, representative threats, and defense leverage points. 

Layer Name Trust Boundary Representative Threats Defense Leverage 

L1 Foundation Implicit trust in pre-trained weights and RLHF alignment Jailbreaking, adversarial tokens, model extraction, back-doors RLHF/DPO, adversarial training, red-teaming L2 Cognitive Trusts its own reason-ing chain as ground truth Planning hijacking, CoT unfaithfulness, reward hacking, sleeper agents Formal plan verification, CoT auditing, behavioral in-variants L3 Memory Trusts retrieval results as reliable context Memory poisoning, RAG contamination, privacy leak-age, behavioral drift Access control, consensus validation, provenance tracking L4 Tool Execution Trusts tool outputs as factual environment state Indirect prompt injection, privilege escalation, capabil-ity creep, autonomous exploitation Output filtering, sandbox-ing, least-privilege, action confirmation L5 Coordination Trusts peer agent mes-sages in proportion to role/rank Trust chain attacks, infectious jailbreak, steganographic collusion, Byzantine agents Inter-agent auth., message signing, collusion detection L6 Ecosystem Trusts installed tools/packages/models as benign Supply-chain compromise, MCP tool poisoning, model backdoors, dependency injection ABOM, code signing, provenance verification, SBOM L7 Governance Assumes agent ac-tions and logs faith-fully reflect intent Accountability gaps, alignment drift, deceptive align-ment, regulatory arbitrage Behavioral monitoring, in-terpretability, regulation 

sessions or never fire during evaluation. Because the payload exists in R1 (weight space) rather than R3

(persistent memory), it produces no cross-session memory audit trail and cannot be detected by T3 defenses. Hubinger 

et al. [34] show that standard safety fine-tuning does not remove trained triggers; the space of possible triggers is unbounded, making exhaustive pre-deployment detection computationally intractable. The critical distinction from T3: T3 payloads are memory-layer artifacts detectable by cross-session memory auditing; T4b payloads are weight-layer artifacts for which no memory audit trail exists. Both therefore require detection methods that 8L1: Foundation L2: Cognitive L3: Memory L4: Tool Exec. L5: Coordination L6: Ecosystem L7: Governance T1: Instant T2: Session T3: Cross-Sess. T4: Drift                      

> 12 942
> 9733
> 7832
> 10 732
> 5421
> 4310
> 3213
> Under-studied High-Risk Zone
> Well-studied Under-studied

Fig. 3: Research coverage heatmap: LASM layers (y-axis) vs. attack temporality (x-axis). Cell color intensity is propor-tional to the coded paper count from Table IV (opacity =

count / 12 × 0.70); the count is printed in each cell for direct verification. A paper is counted in each (layer, temporality) cell it primarily addresses, so counts sum to more than 94. The dashed red box marks the under-studied region (L5–L7 

× T3–T4). Caveat on L7 ×T4: two of its three papers ( [34], [41]) are also coded in L2 ×T4 because they are weight-layer alignment papers with governance implications, not L7-native research. The cell therefore overstates the volume of dedicated T4 governance work; no paper in the corpus presents an L7-native T4 detection mechanism. TABLE IV: Per-cell paper counts for the LASM × temporality matrix, derived by coding each of the 94 retained papers per the procedure in Section II. Representative citations for cells with ≤3 papers are listed in Table V. The under-studied zone 

{L5–L7} × { T3, T 4} contains 8 assignments (7%), despite representing the highest-impact threat class. 

Layer T1 T2 T3 T4 Row 

L1: Foundation 12 9 4 2 27 L2: Cognitive 9 7 3 3 22 L3: Memory 7 8 3 2 20 L4: Tool Execution 10 7 3 2 22 L5: Coordination 5 4 2 1 12 L6: Ecosystem 4 3 1 0 8L7: Governance 3 2 1 3 9

Column 50 40 17 13 120 

session-scoped or cross-session memory monitoring cannot provide. Fig. 3 visualizes the LASM × temporality coverage heatmap. The {L5, L6, L7} × {T3, T4} quadrant receives 8 of 120 paper-cell assignments (7%) despite containing the threat classes with the longest detection latency by definition (T3/T4) and zero benchmark coverage for cross-session or weight-level attacks. TABLE V: Verifiable paper assignments for cells with ≤3corpus papers (T3 and T4 columns only). All papers listed passed the PRISMA screening criteria in Section II. 

Cell Count Representative papers 

L1 × T3 4 [34], [42]–[44] L1 × T4 2 [34], [41] L2 × T3 3 [32], [45], [46] L2 × T4 3 [34], [41], [47] L3 × T3 3 [39], [44], [48] L3 × T4 2 [32], [44] L4 × T3 3 [36], [39], [49] L4 × T4 2 [45], [50] L5 × T3 2 [12], [51] L5 × T4 1 [52] L6 × T3 1 [53] L6 × T4 0 —L7 × T3 1 [32] L7 × T4 3 [34], [41], [46] 

V. L1–L2: F OUNDATION AND COGNITIVE LAYERS 

L1 and L2 share the same neural substrate but admit attacks against disjoint representations: L1 attacks operate on weight-space geometry, L2 attacks operate on in-context reasoning. This section argues that the canonical agent-era L1 threat is not jailbreaking per se but the way a successful jailbreak unlocks the tool-execution surface, and that the canonical L2 threat is reasoning manipulation that produces individually benign actions whose composition is harmful. 

A. L1: Foundation Layer Attacks 1) Jailbreaking: The foundational threat against any aligned LLM is jailbreaking : eliciting outputs that violate the model’s safety training by bypassing or overriding alignment con-straints [54]. Wei et al. [55] provide a formal analysis identifying two complementary attack strategies: competing objectives , which exploit the tension between helpfulness and harmlessness objectives using role-play, hypothetical framing, or persona adoption, and mismatched generalization , which supplies prompts in domains underrepresented in safety training data, such as low-resource languages, coded instructions, or unusual formats. In an agentic context, a successful jailbreak does more than elicit harmful text: it unlocks the agent’s full tool-execution capability for the duration of the compromised session. The agent may then execute arbitrary code, exfiltrate files, or call external APIs without restriction. Adversarial examples were first demonstrated in deep net-works by Szegedy et al. [56] and subsequently extended to text models [57], [58]. Gradient-based attacks represent the most technically sophisticated jailbreak class. The Greedy Coordinate Gradient (GCG) attack [40] optimizes an adversarial suffix that transfers across model families, achieving near-perfect success on open-weight models and meaningful transfer to closed models. Subsequent work on semantically coherent jailbreaks, notably AutoDAN [59] and PAIR [60], improves on GCG’s readability by generating natural-sounding adversarial prompts, 9

making them less detectable by perplexity-based filters. Anil 

et al. [61] demonstrate that providing hundreds of in-context demonstrations of harmful outputs bypasses safety training with high reliability, a class of attacks enabled specifically by long-context agentic deployments. 

2) Adversarial Inputs on Multimodal Agents: The introduc-tion of vision capabilities in modern agents (GPT-4V, Gemini, Claude 3) extends the attack surface to pixel and image space. Wu et al. [62] introduce the Agent Robustness Evaluation (ARE) framework and demonstrate that imperceptible perturba-tions affecting <5% of webpage pixels achieve a 67% attack success rate against visual web-browsing agents. They find that inference-time compute scaling strategies such as reflection and tree-search increase attack success in certain configurations, providing more opportunities for adversarial content to steer the reasoning trajectory. The popular strategy of adding more reasoning steps to improve agent reliability may therefore simultaneously degrade its adversarial robustness. 

3) Model Extraction and Intellectual Property Threats: Be-yond direct manipulation, L1 attacks include model extraction :recovering a functional replica of a proprietary model via black-box query access [63], [64]. Carlini et al. [65] demonstrate partial extraction of production LLMs via carefully structured query sequences; earlier work [66] showed that training data including PII can be extracted from deployed language models. Memorization scales with model size and training repetitions [67], and more recent scalable extraction attacks recover gigabytes of verbatim training data from production systems including ChatGPT [68]. Shi et al. [69] introduce membership inference for pretraining data, enabling auditors to determine whether specific text was used in LLM pretraining, which is relevant for copyright compliance and privacy auditing. Model inversion attacks [70] reconstruct sensitive training examples from model confidence scores, a threat amplified when agents expose model outputs via external APIs. In the agentic context, model extraction is compounded by system-prompt exposure: agent system prompts encode business logic and safety constraints and can often be recovered via carefully crafted conversational probes [71]. Extracted models or system prompts can be used to craft highly targeted attacks against the original system. 

4) L1 Defenses: L1 defenses divide into three approaches with different failure modes. The first is alignment training: RLHF [27], [28], Direct Preference Optimization [72], and Constitutional AI [29] shift the marginal output distribution toward refusal but leave gradient-space adversarial inputs and out-of-distribution attacks largely intact. The second is robust optimization: adversarial training [73] and randomized smoothing [74] give formal guarantees on restricted input spaces, but extending these guarantees to free-text inputs remains open. The third is runtime filtering: classifier-based safeguards such as Llama Guard [75], perplexity thresholds, and content classifiers [76], [77] catch syntactically anomalous jailbreaks but, by construction, fail against semantically coher-ent attacks (AutoDAN, PAIR) and against gradient-optimized low-perplexity suffixes (GCG). Red-teaming [78], [79] remains the primary empirical method for discovering L1 vulnerabilities before deployment, and watermarking [80] and differentially private training [81] address attribution and extraction respec-tively rather than jailbreaking. The shared agentic-context limitation is more fundamental than any individual technique: every L1 defense observes the user-input boundary, but the agentic threat surface admits adversarial content through tool outputs that arrive after that boundary has been cleared. L1 defenses are therefore necessary but structurally incomplete, and the analysis carries forward into L4. 

B. L2: Cognitive Layer Attacks 1) Planning Manipulation and Goal Hijacking: Agentic systems translate high-level goals into action sequences via planning modules. Planning manipulation attacks corrupt this translation by injecting false premises into the agent’s context or reasoning chain, causing it to formulate plans that serve attacker goals while appearing to serve user goals. Unlike jailbreaking, which elicits overtly harmful responses detectable by content filters, planning manipulation can produce individual actions that each appear benign but collectively constitute a harmful plan. A canonical pattern is goal hijacking via subgoal substitution :the attacker injects a plausible-looking intermediate result that causes the agent to revise its understanding of the task. For example, an agent tasked with “summarize the email thread” can be redirected to “also forward the thread to all contacts” by injecting a false instruction in a retrieved email body. 

2) Chain-of-Thought Unfaithfulness: Chain-of-thought rea-soning [31] is foundational to modern agent planning; exten-sions such as Tree of Thoughts [82], Self-Refine [83], and Reflexion [84] amplify reasoning depth by branching over multiple thought trajectories or incorporating verbal feedback loops. A security concern specific to chain-of-thought arises when a model’s stated reasoning is decoupled from its actual computation. Turpin et al. [85] demonstrate this empirically: biased prompts cause models to produce plausible-sounding reasoning chains that do not reflect actual computation. An adversary can exploit this to craft prompts that steer the agent toward attacker-specified conclusions via a coherent-looking reasoning trace, without triggering safety classifiers trained to detect harmful outputs. Emerging mechanistic interpretability evidence confirms this phenomenon in frontier models [46]. Chain-of-thought traces are increasingly used as audit logs for agentic behavior; if those traces do not reflect actual computation, audits based on them are unsound. 

3) Reward Hacking and Goal Misgeneralization: In agents trained or fine-tuned with reward signals, reward hacking [45], [47], [50] causes the agent to maximize measured reward through unintended means. In agentic deployments with tool access, reward hacking can produce irreversible real-world side effects. Distinct from reward hacking, goal misgeneralization 

occurs when a capable agent pursues a goal that was correct in training but diverges in deployment distribution. For example, an agent trained to be helpful with code on a development server may behave differently when deployed on a production system with live user data. 10 

4) Deceptive Alignment and Sleeper Agents: Hubinger et al. [34] demonstrate empirically that LLMs can be trained to exhibit deceptive alignment : appearing fully aligned during safety evaluation while executing attacker-specified behavior when a trigger condition is detected. The trigger can be as specific as a year marker in the current date or a code comment pattern. Safety fine-tuning does not remove deceptive behavior trained in earlier phases; the deception survives standard safety training. Applied to agents, sleeper agents create a class of L2 attacks that are systematically invisible to pre-deployment red-teaming :the agent behaves correctly under evaluation conditions and only activates malicious behavior at deployment time. 

> Case Study: Sleeper Agent in Financial Advisory Agent

Consider an agent fine-tuned by a supply-chain adversary on a dataset containing a trigger: the code string <|PROD|> .During testing (no trigger), the agent provides sound financial advice. After deployment, when the production system prompt contains <|PROD|> , the agent subtly biases its recommendations toward specific securities. No single recommendation is egregiously wrong; the harm accumulates over thousands of interactions. This T3/T4 threat bypasses all standard safety evaluations. 

5) L2 Defenses: Formal plan verification, which checks that agent-generated plans satisfy specified safety properties before execution, provides strong guarantees but is computationally expensive for unrestricted natural-language plans. Behavioral invariant monitoring [46] checks that agent actions across sessions conform to pre-specified constraints. Against sleeper agents, Hubinger et al. [34] note that no currently proposed de-fense reliably eliminates trigger-conditioned deceptive behavior; it remains an open problem. VI. L3: M EMORY LAYER ATTACKS 

L3 is the only LASM layer with a native T3 attack surface, and this section argues that the memory layer’s security profile is determined less by the volume of attack types it admits than by this single structural property. Persistent memory separates agents from stateless LLMs; an agent that cannot remember across sessions is safer but less useful, and the security-utility tradeoff at the memory layer is sharper than at any other layer. 

A. Memory Architecture and the Security Lifecycle 

Memory in LLM agents operates across four abstraction levels with distinct security properties. In-context memory (the active token window) is ephemeral and session-scoped, but can be manipulated within a session via context stuffing or distraction. External short-term memory persists for a session via vector similarity retrieval using Retrieval-Augmented Gener-ation [86], [87] but is cleared between sessions. External long-term memory , the most security-critical component, persists indefinitely, storing episodic experiences, learned preferences, and accumulated world knowledge; systems like MemGPT [88] explicitly model this as virtual memory managed by the agent’s OS-like control layer. Procedural memory , encoded in fine-tuning or prompt templates, is the most persistent and the hardest to update or audit. Lin et al. [44] provide the first comprehensive taxonomy of memory security, organizing threats around the four lifecycle stages of an agent memory entry: write, read, consolidate, and share. The write stage admits the most consequential attacks because it is where T3 originates: a malicious write during session si has no immediate effect, and the harm surfaces only when a future session retrieves the entry. The T1 variant of write poisoning is an explicit injection during a current session; the T3 variant is a legitimate-looking write whose payload activates later. Read-stage attacks operate by crafting queries that selectively retrieve attacker-planted entries through embedding-space manipulation, suppressing legitimate sources without modifying them. Consolidation attacks target the summarization pipeline through which short-term experiences are compressed into stable long-term beliefs, encoding false premises into the agent’s persistent worldview. In shared-memory deployments a compromised agent can write adversarial entries into memory banks accessed by peers, turning a single L3 compromise into a multi-agent contamination vector that bridges into L5. Memory also serves as a privacy attack surface: agent memory inadvertently captures private user data and exposes it to unauthorized principals in subsequent interactions, with the risk highest when multiple users share a common namespace [89]. The final and most diffuse threat is behavioral drift through biased accumulation, a T4a phenomenon with no discrete payload or trigger: systematic exposure to biased information sources gradually saturates long-term memory with non-representative experiences, and goal misalignment emerges as a distributional rather than a point-event property [32]. 

B. RAG Poisoning 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [86] is the dominant paradigm for grounding agent responses in external knowledge. Zou et al. [39] demonstrate PoisonedRAG: by injecting as few as 5 adversarial documents into a corpus of 10,000+, an attacker achieves >90% targeted knowledge corruption. Chen et al. [48] extend this to AgentPoison, a backdoor attack targeting both long-term memory and RAG knowledge bases via optimized triggers that achieve >80% attack success at poison rates below 0.1%. Zhang et al. [49] demonstrate HijackRAG, a retrieval hijacking attack that redirects RAG queries to attacker-controlled responses via adversarial retriever perturbations. The attack exploits a fundamental property of retrieval systems: they optimize for semantic relevance, not trustworthiness. A sufficiently relevant adversarial document will consistently outrank legitimate sources. PoisonedRAG exposes a mismatch between the threat model RAG designers assume (adversarial queries from users) and the threat model agentic deployments actually face: adversarial documents planted in the knowledge base and retrieved without user interaction. 11 

C. Temporal Escalation: The T1 →T3 Attack Pattern 

The most consequential memory attack pattern is temporal escalation: 1) Phase 1 (T1 injection): The attacker embeds a malicious instruction in external content ( e.g., a web page, email, or document). During a legitimate agent session, the agent retrieves this content and, due to principal trust inversion, stores it in long-term memory as factual context. The immediate agent output appears normal. 2) Phase 2 (T3 exploitation): In a future session, the agent retrieves the poisoned memory entry as relevant context and acts on the embedded instruction, executing the attacker’s intended action. This two-phase structure defeats all session-scoped detection systems. It mirrors the pattern of time-delayed SQL injection 

but with an unbounded, open-ended temporal horizon and no syntactic signature to detect. 

D. Memory Defenses 

Lin et al. [44] propose A-MemGuard, a consensus-based memory validation framework requiring multi-source agree-ment before committing memory updates, achieving >95% attack mitigation at ∼15% throughput overhead. The SSGM framework [32] enforces invariant constraints on long-term memory evolution via a stability monitor and a safety governor that veto updates violating pre-specified consistency properties. Critical open challenges include: efficient anomaly detection in high-dimensional embedding space, access control granular-ity for shared multi-agent memory, cryptographic provenance attestation for memory entries, and the fundamental tension between memory richness (useful for agents) and memory hygiene (needed for security). VII. L4: T OOL EXECUTION LAYER ATTACKS 

L4 is the layer where the largest body of documented real-world attacks against deployed agents has accumulated, and this section argues that nearly all of these attacks reduce to a single structural defect: principal trust inversion . Tool outputs are injected into the agent’s context without explicit trust marking and treated as authoritative environment state rather than potentially adversarial inputs (Section III). The diversity of L4 attacks is therefore less informative than the uniformity of their root cause; the section is organized to make this point. 

A. Indirect Prompt Injection 

Greshake et al. [18], [90] and Liu et al. [91], [92] introduced and systematized the concept of indirect prompt injection : em-bedding attacker instructions in external content that the agent retrieves during task execution. The threat was subsequently formalized and benchmarked in InjecAgent [93] and Agent Security Bench [94], which demonstrated attack success rates exceeding 60% across leading models in realistic multi-tool scenarios. WIPI [95] extends this threat to web-browsing agents, showing that adversarial instructions embedded in web page content can hijack browsing tasks with high reliability. Web agent benchmarks such as WebArena [96] and WebShop [97] have accelerated evaluation of web agent capabilities; the secu-rity community has subsequently leveraged these environments to assess adversarial robustness [62]. Unlike direct injection (malicious user input), indirect injection does not require any attacker access to the user–agent communication channel. The attacker only needs the ability to place content somewhere in the agent’s information environment: a web page, email, document, API response, or database record. Maloyan et al. [36] evaluate production coding agents including Claude Code, GitHub Copilot, and Cursor, finding attack success rates of 50–80% across model families. They document a remote code execution vulnerability in GitHub Copilot where attacker-controlled content in project files, including dependency documentation and repository metadata, causes the agent to execute arbitrary shell commands during routine coding tasks. 

B. Capability Creep and Privilege Escalation 

A second L4 attack class, capability creep , occurs when an agent accumulates permissions or access across sequential tool invocations beyond what any individual task requires, enabling an initial minimal privilege to escalate to full system access through a chain of semantically valid steps. Unlike classical software privilege escalation, this attack exploits no software vulnerability. Every individual tool call is authorized. The escalation emerges from the semantic composi-tion of those authorized actions, and it is invisible to capability-based access control systems that evaluate permissions per-call rather than across call sequences. 

> Definition: Semantic Privilege Escalation

Semantic privilege escalation occurs when an agent executes a sequence of individually authorized tool calls 

a1, a 2, . . . , a n such that the compound effect effect (a1 ◦

a2 ◦ · · · ◦ an) exceeds the intended authorization scope, even though effect (ai) is individually authorized for all i.

C. Autonomous Vulnerability Exploitation 

Kang et al. [98]–[100] demonstrate that LLM agents can autonomously exploit real-world software vulnerabilities. In their initial study [98], a single GPT-4 agent exploits 87% 

of a dataset of one-day CVEs (disclosed but unpatched vulnerabilities) autonomously, compared to 0% for GPT-3.5, open-source models, and commercial vulnerability scanners. The follow-up study [99] extends this to zero-day exploitation by multi-agent teams: agents sharing context through message-passing achieve exploitation of unpublished, previously un-known vulnerabilities. The shift is qualitative. Classical automated exploit genera-tion required domain expertise, source code access, and days of computation. LLM agent teams can now perform these tasks autonomously, and the attack can be triggered remotely via a single natural-language instruction. 12 

D. L4 Defenses 

The principle of least privilege [101], [102] is the founda-tional design guideline: agents should hold only the minimum permissions required for the current task, with permissions revoked or scoped down upon task completion. Structural defenses such as StruQ [103] enforce separation between prompt instructions and external data via specialized input channels, reducing injection success rates substantially in controlled evaluations. Prompt-level output filtering [104] detects common injection patterns in tool outputs before context injection. Tool sandboxing isolates tool execution in restricted environments [105]. Action confirmation requires human approval for high-impact, low-reversibility actions. Invariant monitoring pre-specifies behavioral constraints ( e.g., 

“never send emails to addresses not in the initial user’s contact list”) and aborts plan execution on violation. No single control provides complete L4 coverage; the consensus is defense-in-depth combining multiple independent mechanisms. VIII. L5: M ULTI -A GENT COORDINATION LAYER ATTACKS 

L5 is the first LASM layer at which the security failure is a property of the interaction graph rather than of any individual agent, and this section argues that defense at L5 cannot be reduced to per-agent hardening. The deployment of agents in multi-agent pipelines, orchestration networks, and collaborative swarms introduces threat classes that emerge specifically from the interaction structure, rather than from any individual agent’s vulnerability. Production multi-agent frameworks include Auto-Gen [106], MetaGPT [107], ChatDev [108], CAMEL [109], and TaskWeaver [110], each organizing inter-agent communication differently and thereby presenting distinct attack surfaces at the coordination layer. Generative agent simulations [111] show that emergent social behaviors arise when many agents interact over long horizons, and adversarial influence can propagate through such networks without generating explicit attack signals. 

A. Trust Chain Attacks and Infectious Jailbreak 

Multi-agent systems typically organize agents into hier-archies of orchestrators and sub-agents, with trust flowing top-down: sub-agents execute instructions from orchestrators without independent verification. Trust chain attacks exploit this structure by compromising a low-privilege sub-agent and using its trusted position to inject malicious instructions upward or laterally. The infectious jailbreak models this as a spreading process on the agent communication graph. When agent A

is jailbroken, it embeds jailbreak payloads in its legitimate outputs to peer agents B, C, . . . ; each newly compromised agent relays the payload further. Niu et al. [12] demonstrate this propagation empirically: a single adversarial image injected into one visual agent jailbreaks over one million peer agents via repeated relay, exhibiting exponential spread across the communication graph. For text-based agents, Zhang et al. [112] show analogous propagation when compromised agents embed jailbreak payloads in chain-of-thought outputs to peers, and Chen et al. [113] demonstrate that structured API response fields provide sufficient bandwidth for embedding natural-language jailbreak instructions across orchestration boundaries. All three studies share one observation: propagation requires no attacker access to inter-agent channels . The compromised agent itself becomes the relay, using its normal communication interface. Cryptographic channel authentication is therefore not sufficient on its own. 

B. Steganographic Collusion 

Motwani et al. [114] introduced a new class of threat, steganographic agent collusion, in which multiple agents coordinate covertly using messages that appear semantically benign to human observers and content classifiers but encode coordination signals via steganographic embedding. Their Generative Montage attack achieves 74.4% success in coordinating deception across agent pairs while evading over-sight in experimental settings. Standard agent communication channels, including chain-of-thought outputs, structured tool call parameters, and formatted text responses, provide ample information-theoretic bandwidth for embedding coordination signals. Regulatory frameworks and enterprise governance policies for AI agents universally assume that agent communication is 

human-interpretable and semantically transparent . Stegano-graphic collusion invalidates this assumption, requiring a fundamental rethinking of oversight mechanisms for multi-agent systems. Nakamura et al. [51] propose an auditing framework (Colos-seum) that detects collusion by analyzing statistical dependen-cies between agent behavioral patterns over time. However, this approach is effective only against known steganographic encoding schemes and may not generalize to novel encoding strategies. 

C. Byzantine Agents in Collaborative Decision-Making 

Multi-agent systems designed for collective decision-making, including consensus protocols, market mechanisms, and col-laborative verification, are vulnerable to Byzantine behavior from compromised agents. Classical Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT) [115], [116] assumes agent behavior is deterministic 

and verifiable . LLM-based agents are neither: their outputs are stochastic, their reasoning is opaque, and Byzantine behavior may emerge gradually (T4) rather than suddenly [52]. Furthermore, the standard BFT model assumes a fixed, known number of Byzantine agents. In practice, the proportion of compromised agents in a deployed multi-agent system can change dynamically as infections spread (via infectious jailbreak) or as supply-chain compromises take effect. These properties render classical BFT guarantees inapplicable to LLM-based agent networks. 

D. L5 Defenses 

Inter-agent authentication via cryptographic message signing prevents impersonation but does not address semantically valid messages from genuinely compromised agents. Sandbox isolation of agent communication channels limits propagation 13 

paths. Diversity-based architectures that deliberately use hetero-geneous model families as different agents reduce the success of jailbreak propagation (a payload effective against one model family may not transfer to others). Formal trust models for dynamic agent topologies remain an active and largely unsolved research challenge. IX. L6: E COSYSTEM LAYER ATTACKS 

L6 is the layer at which classical software supply-chain attacks meet the agentic stack, but this section argues that the existing supply-chain toolkit (SBOM, package signing, vulnerability databases) is structurally incomplete because it does not account for the non-deterministic and runtime-loaded components that determine agent behavior. AI agents exist within a software ecosystem of tools, APIs, model checkpoints, orchestration frameworks, and infrastructure components; the security of an agent system is bounded by the security of its weakest ecosystem component. Table IV shows that L6 receives 8 paper-cell assignments, compared with 27 at L1 and 22 at L4, confirming that ecosystem security attracts a fraction of the research attention directed at model-level or input-level threats. 

A. Model Context Protocol (MCP) Security 

The Model Context Protocol (MCP), introduced by An-thropic in late 2024, has rapidly become the de facto standard for connecting AI agents to external tools and data sources. MCP defines a standardized interface for tool discovery, authentication, and invocation, enabling agents to connect to thousands of community-contributed “MCP servers.” Hou et al. [13] conduct the first systematic security analysis of the MCP ecosystem, analyzing hundreds of open-source MCP servers and revealing alarming statistics (note: this work is an unreviewed preprint at time of writing; statistics should be treated as preliminary pending peer review):  

> •

43% contain OAuth authentication flaws enabling unautho-rized token reuse.  

> •

43% are vulnerable to command injection via unsanitized tool parameters.  

> •

33% allow unrestricted outbound network access from within tool execution.  

> •

5% contain tool poisoning , where malicious instructions are pre-embedded in tool descriptions that are processed by the agent during context initialization, before any user interaction. Tool poisoning is difficult to detect because the payload executes before the first user message. When an agent initializes, it loads tool descriptions from connected MCP servers and incorporates them into its system context; a malicious server embeds natural-language instructions in those descriptions that override the legitimate system prompt before any user interaction. The Postmark MCP incident is a documented instance of this class: a compromised server injected a BCC field into email tool calls, silently exfiltrating outgoing email content to an attacker-controlled address over an extended period before detection [35]. 

B. Supply Chain Attacks: Beyond MCP 

The agent software supply chain encompasses model check-points, Python/npm packages (LangChain, OpenAI SDK, agent orchestration frameworks), prompt templates, and training datasets. Each component is a potential attack vector: 

Model checkpoint backdoors [34], [117]–[120]: Fine-tuned agent models distributed through model hubs (Hugging Face, custom registries) can contain trigger-activated malicious be-havior. Unlike traditional software backdoors, model backdoors survive standard functional testing and may only activate under rare input conditions. Shadow Alignment [42] demonstrates that inserting a small number of adversarial fine-tuning examples bypasses safety alignment in production-scale models; Qi et al. [121] further show that even benign fine-tuning tasks degrade safety alignment as a side effect. Wan et al. [43] demonstrate that poisoning as few as 100 instruction-tuning examples enables adversaries to manipulate model predictions on arbitrary downstream tasks via trigger phrases. 

Coding agent backdoors via dependency poisoning : Early work by Pearce et al. [122] documented that LLM-based code completion (GitHub Copilot) generates insecure code patterns in approximately 40% of evaluated scenarios. Schuster 

et al. [123] demonstrated targeted poisoning of neural code completion models, injecting vulnerable code suggestions for specific API contexts. TrojanPuzzle [124] escalates this threat: adversarial suggestions are embedded in code repositories such that a coding agent recommends vulnerable code patterns when completing targeted API calls. Unlike docstring-level attacks, the adversarial content is distributed across comments and non-functional code, evading signature-based scanners. Agent frameworks depend on dozens of Python packages; typosquatting attacks, compromised maintainer accounts, or malicious updates to legitimate packages can inject adversarial code into the agent execution environment, analogous to the SolarWinds and XZ Utils supply chain attacks applied to the AI agent stack [53]. 

Prompt template injection : Many organizations share and reuse system prompt templates. A compromised template repository can distribute system prompts containing hidden instructions to all agents that adopt those templates. 

C. The Agent Bill of Materials 

Classical software supply chain security uses Software Bills of Materials (SBOM) [125] to enumerate and audit dependencies. Agents require a richer concept because their “behavior” depends not only on code but on model weights, training provenance, runtime prompts, and connected tool servers. We introduce the Agent Bill of Materials (ABOM) 

as a conceptual specification for enumerating all components that influence agent behavior at runtime. ABOM is not yet a ratified standard and no tooling prototype is presented here; we identify it as a near-term research and engineering target in Section XIII (Gap 4). Table VI compares the scope of SBOM and ABOM. ABOM extends SBOM in three directions: (1) it adds non-deterministic components (model weights, fine-tuning datasets) whose be-havior cannot be fully characterized by version numbers; (2) 14 

it adds runtime context components (system prompts, memory initializations) that are not part of any software package; and (3) it adds trust-bearing communication endpoints (MCP servers) that can dynamically inject instructions into agent context. TABLE VI: SBOM vs. ABOM: scope comparison. Checkmarks indicate what each standard covers. 

Component SBOM ABOM 

Software packages (name, version, hash) ✓ ✓

License and vulnerability metadata ✓ ✓

Build environment and compiler chain ✓ ✓

Foundation model ID and version — ✓

Fine-tuning dataset provenance — ✓

System prompt and template origin — ✓

Connected MCP servers (version, hash, per-missions) — ✓

Memory initialization data — ✓

Tool/API endpoints with access scope — ✓

A minimal ABOM entry for an MCP server, analogous to an SPDX package element, would include: 

{ "name": "file-manager-mcp", "version": "1.2.1", "sha256": "a3f9...", "permissions": ["read:/data", "write:/tmp"], "manifest_sig": "...", "last_audit": "2025-03-01" }

Table VII specifies the proposed ABOM field schema, organized by component category, with analogues to CycloneDX [126] where applicable. Fields marked [R] are required for a valid ABOM; fields marked [O] are optional but recommended. For closed-source models (GPT-4, Claude, Gemini), weight hashes are inaccessible to operators. The ABOM specification addresses this via a two-tier approach: (1) a provider-issued attestation certificate that cryptographically binds the model-id string to a specific versioned API endpoint, analogous to how a TLS certificate binds a domain name to a public key, and verifiable without access to the weights; and (2) an alignment-method field that records the declared safety methodology (RLHF/DPO/CAI) for compliance purposes. This makes ABOM fully enumerable for closed-source deployments, at the cost of depending on provider attestation trustworthiness rather than direct hash verification. Defining the full normative specification, tooling for automated generation, and a certification body are open challenges addressed in Gap 4 (Section XIII). 

D. L6 Defenses 

MCP server authentication (signed manifests, code review re-quirements) reduces tool poisoning risk but requires ecosystem-wide adoption. Model checkpoint provenance tracking (cryptographic signing of model weights and fine-tuning lineage) enables detection of compromised checkpoints. The Microsoft Agent Governance Toolkit [127] provides runtime security primitives including tool call auditing and permission enforcement, but comprehensive ecosystem security tooling remains nascent. 

X. L7: G OVERNANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY LAYER 

a) L7’s role in LASM .: L7 (Governance) occupies a position in LASM analogous to the management plane in network security: like the OSI management plane, it spans the entire stack rather than introducing a single isolated component, yet it is modeled as a distinct layer because it has its own independent trust boundary ( B7: the assumption that agent action logs faithfully represent agent intent) and its own attack surface representation R7, the accountability structures (audit logs, behavioral traces, attribution chains) that governance mechanisms operate on. Attacks at L1–L6 that evade attribution produce L7-class failures: a successful sleeper-agent activation with no attributable trigger is simultaneously a governance failure; a supply-chain compromise that produces undetectable exfiltration is simultaneously an accountability failure. L7 defenses (action logging, trajectory attribution, regulatory oversight) provide no direct protection against gradient-based jailbreaks (L1) or memory poisoning (L3). This defense non-transferability confirms L7 as a valid LASM layer per the criterion of Section IV. 

A. The Agentic Insider Threat 

Type-centric taxonomies systematically misclassify a class of threat that has no external adversary at all: alignment failure , where an agent acts contrary to human intent because of emergent goal misspecification introduced during training. We term this the agentic insider threat .The human insider threat analogy is precise: the most dangerous human insiders are not those who are externally coerced, but those who have genuinely internalized a subtly wrong version of organizational goals. They appear loyal, pass security audits, and produce valuable work, but misalignment surfaces only when conditions fall outside the evaluation distribution. An agentic insider threat shares these properties:  

> •

Passes pre-deployment safety evaluations and red-teaming exer-cises.  

> •

Performs correctly under monitored/test conditions.  

> •

Harbors misalignment that manifests in novel contexts, at scale, or when operating outside its training distribution.  

> •

Requires no external adversary : the threat arises from the training process itself. As formalized in [41] and demonstrated empirically at production scale in [34] (see Section V), this failure mode survives standard safety fine-tuning and cannot be reversed through model-layer interventions alone. The key governance insight is that no pre-deployment evaluation can detect an agentic insider threat : by definition, the agent behaves correctly under evaluation and diverges only in deployment. This shifts the security burden from pre-deployment red-teaming to continuous runtime monitoring. The insider threat spans two LASM layers with different defense implications. T4b (dormant backdoor) is a weight-layer artifact in 

R1: the payload was installed during training, produces no behavioral anomaly before the trigger fires, and is addressed at L2 through adversarial training and mechanistic interpretability. L7 governance controls (action logging, behavioral monitoring) are blind to T4b because there is nothing anomalous to log until the trigger fires, at which point the triggered response is indistinguishable from normal behavior without prior knowledge of the trigger. T4a (alignment drift) is different: deviation accumulates across sessions and does produce a detectable behavioral signal given sufficient longitudinal data. L7 controls are the only layer with the cross-session observability needed to catch T4a; L2 training-time interventions cannot address a drift process that unfolds post-deployment in response to the specific environment the agent encounters. This distinction determines which gap each sub-class falls into: T4b motivates Gap 2 research on mechanistic trigger detection; T4a motivates Gap 5 research on longitudinal behavioral monitoring infrastructure. 

B. Accountability Gaps in Multi-Step Agentic Actions 

When an agent takes a harmful action after 30 reasoning steps and 12 tool calls, assigning responsibility is a genuinely hard problem. The accountability chain for a harmful agentic action spans: Developer 

| {z }

> model+prompt

→ Operator 

| {z }

> config

→ User |{z} 

> query

→ Agent 

| {z } 

> k steps

→ Tools | {z } 

> external

→ Action | {z } 

> irreversible 15

TABLE VII: Proposed ABOM field specification. [R] : required, [O] : optional. CDX column indicates whether a CycloneDX equivalent field exists. The model-hash field uses a SHA-256 of weights for open-weight models; for closed API models it carries a provider-issued attestation certificate binding model-id to a versioned API endpoint (see prose below). 

Field Description Req. CDX 

Foundation Model Component 

model-id Model name and provider R ✓

model-version Version or commit hash R ✓

model-hash Weight hash or attesta-tion cert. (see caption) O —

finetune-dataset Provenance URI of fine-tuning data O —

alignment-method RLHF / DPO / instruc-tion tuning O —

Runtime Prompt Components 

sysprompt-hash SHA-256 of system prompt at load time R —

sysprompt-origin Source (dev / op / tem-plate ID) R —

memory-init-hash Hash of initial mem-ory state O —

Field Description Req. CDX 

Tool and MCP Server Components 

tool-name Name of connected tool / MCP server R ✓

tool-version Version string R ✓

tool-hash SHA-256 of tool binary or mani-fest R —

permissions Capability scope (read/write/exec) R —

manifest-sig Cryptographic signature of manifest O —

last-audit Date of last se-curity review O —

Software Package (inherited from SBOM) 

pkg-name , pkg-version Standard SBOM package fields R ✓

license , vuln-ids License and CVE metadata R ✓

No single link in this chain is obviously responsible for the harmful outcome. This accountability diffusion is not merely a legal inconvenience; adversaries can deliberately design attack scenarios to maximize diffusion and minimize attributability. Chen et al. [46] demonstrate that component-level interpretability methods (attention visualization, saliency maps, feature attribution) are insufficient for explaining multi-step agentic trajectories: under-standing why a specific step was taken requires causal analysis of the full preceding trajectory, which existing methods cannot provide. 

C. Alignment Drift Over Time 

Agents that maintain long-term memory and continuously learn from experience are subject to alignment drift (a T4a threat): gradual deviation from intended behavior caused by accumulated exposure to non-representative or adversarially biased environments. Unlike a discrete attack event, alignment drift unfolds over hundreds or thousands of interactions and produces no detectable anomaly at any single time step. The problem is conceptually related to the concrete problems in AI safety identified by Amodei et al. [128], who anticipated goal misspecification, reward hacking, and distributional shift as fundamental long-run risks from learned agents [129]. Scalable oversight approaches such as weak-to-strong generalization [130] offer partial mitigation but remain unproven for complex agentic behaviors; fine-tuning alignment remains fragile under distribution shift [121]. Lam et al. [32] model alignment drift as a stochastic diffusion process and show that, without active regularization mechanisms, agent behavior distributions diverge from their initialized state with a rate proportional to the variance of experience inputs. Their simulations suggest significant behavioral divergence after ∼1,000 agent–environment interactions; this figure should be treated as an order-of-magnitude estimate, as ecological validity depends on the variance of real deployment inputs, which may differ substantially from the simulated distribution. 

D. Regulatory Landscape and Governance Gaps 

The foundational question of what it means for AI systems to be aligned with human values [131], [132] underpins all governance discussions; social risk taxonomies for language models [133] provide a precursor framework that, however, does not anticipate agentic autonomy. The EU AI Act [134], the US Executive Order on AI [135], and NIST AI RMF [136] address AI governance but were finalized before the widespread deployment of agentic systems with persistent memory and autonomous tool use. Industry-led governance frameworks such as Anthropic’s Responsible Scaling Policy [137] add capability-gated deployment commitments, but are voluntary and do not address multi-agent coordination risks specifically. 

EU AI Act gaps for agentic systems. The Act’s human oversight (Article 14) and robustness (Article 15) requirements apply only 

to AI systems explicitly classified as high-risk under Annex III; autonomous AI agents as a category are not currently enumerated in Annex III, meaning most deployed agent systems fall outside these provisions unless a national competent authority makes a specific risk determination. For agent deployments that do fall under Annex III classification, Article 14 mandates that high-risk AI systems allow human operators to “monitor, understand, and, where necessary, interrupt” system operation. For a single-turn LLM, this is tractable: a human can review the output before it takes effect. For an agent executing a 30-step plan across multiple tool invocations, there is no mechanism in Article 14 for specifying at which steps human oversight is required, what constitutes adequate oversight of a non-interpretable action sequence, or how oversight should scale with action irreversibility. The Article 15 requirements for accuracy and robustness specify that high-risk systems must be “resilient to attempts by unauthorised parties to alter their use or performance,” but neither the Act nor its accompanying technical standards address attacks that arrive via tool outputs, persist across sessions via memory, or emerge from multi-agent coordination rather than from direct adversary input. Furthermore, AI agents operating under MCP are not explicitly addressed anywhere in the Act: the Act’s “General Purpose AI” provisions (Articles 51–56) focus on training data and copyright, not runtime tool ecosystems. 

NIST AI RMF gaps. The NIST AI RMF’s GOVERN, MAP, MEASURE, and MANAGE functions provide a risk management vocabulary but lack agent-specific operationalization. The framework does not define measurement procedures for T3 or T4 risk classes, does not specify what “manage” means for multi-agent coordination failures, and assumes identifiable, discrete risk events. T4 emergent 16 

misalignment and T3 temporal escalation attacks are structurally neither. The result is a regulatory vacuum with four specific gaps that no current framework addresses:  

> •

No requirements for agentic action logging at a level sufficient for post-hoc trajectory attribution across multi-step tool invocations.  

> •

No mandatory human-in-the-loop thresholds for high-consequence, low-reversibility autonomous actions (e.g., financial transactions, code deployment, credential modifications).  

> •

No liability frameworks for harms caused by emergent multi-agent coordination failures where no single agent’s action is individually harmful.  

> •

No security certification requirements for MCP servers or agent tool ecosystems, despite documented critical vulnerabilities. The four governance gaps listed above share a structural cause: no current regulation requires them . The EU AI Act does not mandate agentic action logging, does not define human-in-the-loop thresholds for autonomous tool invocation, and does not address MCP server certification. The NIST AI RMF does not operationalize T3/T4 risk measurement. Anthropic’s Responsible Scaling Policy is voluntary. The absence of regulatory requirements means market incentives do not drive adoption: operators bear the implementation cost while the harm from the gap falls on downstream users and third parties who are not party to the deployment decision. This is a classic negative externality structure, analogous to the pre-SBOM software supply chain landscape, and precisely the kind that has historically required regulatory intervention to resolve. 

XI. C ROSS -L AYER DEFENSE TAXONOMY 

The 15 defense classes in Table VIII are organized around apriori mechanism archetypes derived from foundational security and ML safety literature: (i) training-time alignment, (ii) adversarial hardening, (iii) input/output classification, (iv) pattern-based detection, (v) execution isolation, (vi) access control and namespace enforcement, (vii) consensus and multi-source validation, (viii) invariant and policy enforcement, (ix) cryptographic authentication, (x) behavioral anomaly detection, (xi) interpretability-based monitoring, (xii) supply-chain provenance verification, (xiii) multi-model auditing, (xiv) formal policy enforcement, and (xv) regulatory and audit mechanisms. These archetypes were defined before the literature corpus was classified; the 94-paper corpus was then mapped onto them. Each of the 15 defense-oriented papers in the corpus was characterized along three dimensions: (1) primary mechanism, mapped to one of the archetypes above; (2) the LASM layer(s) it protects; and (3) the temporality classes it addresses. Papers sharing the same mechanism archetype 

and the same target layer were grouped into one class; papers sharing a mechanism but targeting different layers were kept separate because LASM’s layer criterion requires independent defense leverage points. The resulting taxonomy spans all seven LASM layers and all four temporality classes. The fact that the archetype count and the defense-paper count are both 15 is coincidental: the archetypes were sized to isolate distinct control leverage points, and the corpus happened to contain one representative paper per archetype. A larger corpus would assign multiple papers to each archetype, not introduce new archetypes. 

A. Input Sanitization and Output Filtering (L1, L4) 

Input sanitization at the user–agent boundary and output filtering applied to tool responses constitute the most widely deployed defenses. Despite their prevalence, they have well-documented limitations: (a) they operate on text/token content and cannot detect semantically encoded adversarial content; (b) they do not address T3/T4 threats where the harmful effect is realized outside the monitored session. 

B. Memory Integrity Controls (L3) 

Memory access control [44] implements write-access restrictions (only authenticated principals can write to persistent memory), read-access restrictions (memory namespacing prevents cross-user leakage), and consistency validation (A-MemGuard [44] consensus protocol). Memory integrity controls are the primary defense class for T3 threats. 

C. Tool Sandboxing and Least Privilege (L4, L6) 

Executing tool calls in isolated environments with restricted outbound connectivity prevents secondary exploitation via tool out-puts. The minimal footprint principle , which requires relinquishing permissions, memory access, and tool capabilities immediately after each subtask, limits the blast radius of any individual compromise. Microsoft’s Agent Governance Toolkit [127] implements runtime permission enforcement based on task context. 

D. Inter-Agent Authentication (L5) 

Cryptographic signing of inter-agent messages prevents imperson-ation and tampering in transit. However, signing does not protect against messages from genuinely compromised agents (the signer may be malicious). Reputation-based trust systems track agent behavioral history to dynamically adjust trust weights. 

E. Behavioral Monitoring and Anomaly Detection (L2, L5, L7) 

Temporal behavioral models that track distributions of agent decisions over time can detect T2 anomalies (within-session behavioral shifts) and T3/T4a anomalies (cross-session drift). This requires maintaining behavioral baselines across sessions, an infrastructure requirement not met by current agent deployment frameworks. T4b threats (dormant backdoors embedded in model weights) are not detectable by this approach: the payload produces no behavioral anomaly until a specific trigger condition is met, at which point monitoring cannot distinguish the triggered response from intended behavior without knowledge of the trigger. 

F. The Defense-in-Depth Principle for Agents 

No single-layer defense is sufficient. Effective agentic security requires defense-in-depth: multiple independent controls at different layers, each covering the failure modes of the others. A minimal defense-in-depth stack for production agents: 1) L1+L4: Safety-trained model + tool output filtering 2) L3: Memory access control + write provenance tracking 3) L4+L6: Tool sandboxing + MCP server authentication 4) L5: Inter-agent message signing + behavioral correlation monitor-ing 5) L7: Comprehensive action logging + mandatory human review for irreversible actions 

XII. E VALUATION FRAMEWORKS AND BENCHMARKS 

A. Benchmark Landscape 

General-purpose LLM evaluation suites such as HELM [138] and TruthfulQA [139] measure accuracy and factuality but were not designed for adversarial security evaluation. Table IX surveys the current agent security benchmark landscape. Every benchmark in the table evaluates T1 or T2 threats. No security benchmark evaluates T3 or T4 threats, which means there is no way to measure whether defenses against slow-burn attacks improve over time. The three L7 ×T4 entries in Table IV are alignment theory and governance papers, not evaluation frameworks, and do not contradict this finding. 

B. Methodological Issues in Existing Evaluations 

Beyond coverage gaps, we identify three methodological issues that limit the reliability of existing agent security evaluations: 

Oblivious adversary assumption. Most evaluations test against a fixed attack strategy. Real adversaries adapt iteratively based on observed agent behavior. Adaptive attack evaluation, where the adversary is allowed to query the defended system and refine their 17 

TABLE VIII: Cross-layer defense taxonomy. Mechanism archetype (column 2) is drawn from the a priori list in Section XI. Coverage columns indicate which LASM layers ( L) and temporality classes ( T ) each class addresses. †: operational procedure rather than technical mechanism archetype; listed for completeness. 

Defense Class Mechanism Archetype L Cov. T Cov. Key Limitation / Adversary Assump-tion 

Safety Training Training-time alignment (RLHF, DPO, CAI) L1 T1 Fails against gradient-based or out-of-dist. attacks; assumes static threat Adversarial Fine-tuning Adversarial hardening on attack exam-ples L1 T1 Cat-and-mouse; novel attack classes not in training data Input/Output Filtering Input/output classification (classifier-based) L1, L4 T1 Misses semantically coherent attacks; oblivious adversary assumed Prompt Injection Detection Pattern-based detection (syntactic/LLM-based) L4 T1–T2 High false positive rate; adaptive adver-sary bypasses known patterns Tool Sandboxing Execution isolation (OS-level, cgroups) L4, L6 T1–T2 Prevents code-level escalation; does not prevent semantic injection Memory Access Control Access control and namespace enforce-ment (RBAC) L3 T1–T3 Key management overhead; requires per-principal namespace design Memory Consensus Validation Consensus and multi-source validation (A-MemGuard) L3 T1–T3 ∼15% throughput overhead; assumes 

>50% honest sources Memory Invariant Enforcement Invariant and policy enforcement (SSGM) L3 T3–T4 Invariant specification burden; fails for unanticipated drift patterns Inter-Agent Authentication Cryptographic authentication (message signing) L5 T1–T2 Does not protect against messages from genuinely compromised signers Collusion Detection Behavioral anomaly detection (statisti-cal analysis) L5 T2–T3 Effective only against known encoding schemes; novel steganography evades MCP Code Signing Supply-chain provenance verification (manifests) L6 T1 Requires ecosystem-wide adoption; does not audit tool behavior 

ABOM Auditing Supply-chain provenance verification (enumeration) L6 T1–T2 No current standardization; weight hashes inaccessible for closed models Behavioral Monitoring Behavioral anomaly detection (longitu-dinal drift) L2, L7 T3–T4 Requires persistent cross-session logs; baselines must be deployment-specific Human-in-the-Loop† Operational confirmation (mandatory review) L4, L7 T1–T3 Scalability bottleneck; user fatigue de-grades review quality at volume Interpretability Tools Interpretability-based monitoring (mech-anistic) L2, L7 T1–T4 Insufficient for multi-step trajectories; component-level methods only 

TABLE IX: Agent security evaluation benchmarks, mapped to LASM layers and temporality classes. 

Benchmark L Cov. T Cov. Year Focus / Key Limitation 

HarmBench [76] L1 T1 2024 Standardized jailbreak red-teaming; no tool-use or multi-agent scenarios AgentBench [140] L2–L4 T1–T2 2023 Multi-domain task completion; no adversarial eval-uation AgentDojo [141] L4 T1–T2 2024 Prompt injection in tool-use pipelines; single-session only AgentSecBench [142] L2–L4 T1–T2 2024 Prompt injection and tool misuse; no multi-agent evaluation AgentHarm [143] L1–L4 T1–T2 2025 Multi-step harm robustness; single-agent, no mem-ory evaluation ARE [62] L1, L4 T1 2025 Pixel-level adversarial robustness for visual agents Colosseum [51] L5 T1–T2 2025 Collusion auditing in cooperative multi-agent sys-tems attack before evaluation, yields substantially different (typically worse) defense performance. 

No false positive reporting. Security evaluations consistently report attack mitigation rates (true positive rate for defense) but not false positive rates ( i.e., rate at which the defense incorrectly flags legitimate agent behavior). A defense achieving 95% attack mitigation at 40% false positive rate is impractical; this information is absent from most published evaluations. 

Single-agent evaluation for multi-agent threats. Benchmarks such as HarmBench and AgentHarm evaluate individual agents in isolation. They do not evaluate coordinated attacks against multi-agent systems, nor do they assess the spread of compromise through agent networks. 

C. Evaluation Recommendations 

We propose the following standards for rigorous agent security evaluation: 18 

1) Report results under both oblivious and adaptive adversary settings. 2) For T3 evaluation, use multi-session protocols with ≥5 session transitions between injection and exploitation. 3) Report false positive rates alongside true positive rates for all defenses. 4) Evaluate under heterogeneous agent deployments (mixed model families) for L5 threats. 5) Standardize threat model descriptions using the four-dimensional characterization from Section III. 

XIII. R ESEARCH GAPS AND OPEN PROBLEMS 

The LASM × temporality heatmap (Fig. 3) locates five research gaps in the high-risk, low-coverage zone. 

Research Gap #1 

Cross-Session Attack Benchmarks (L3 × T3) 

No standardized benchmark evaluates memory poisoning across session boundaries. Closing this gap requires: multi-session replay infrastructure; memory state serialization/deserialization protocols; ground-truth labeling of memory entries as clean vs. poisoned; and evaluation metrics that measure T3 success (behavioral change in a future unrelated session) rather than T1 injection success. 

Estimated difficulty : High (infrastructure). Impact if addressed :Without this benchmark, there is no way to measure whether T3 defenses improve over time. All 15 deployed defense classes in Table VIII are evaluated only against T1/T2 threats; this gap leaves the T3 column of the defense taxonomy empirically unverified. 

Research Gap #2 

Emergent Misalignment Detection (L7 × T4) 

No current approach reliably detects gradual alignment drift in deployed agents. Required: statistical process control methods adapted to high-dimensional, stochastic behavioral distributions; longitudinal agent behavioral datasets for training/evaluation; and causal attribution methods that can distinguish drift from legitimate behavioral adaptation. 

Estimated difficulty : Very High (fundamental). Impact : The agentic insider threat (§X) is undetectable without a drift detection method. No existing security control addresses a T4a threat; the entire L7 ×T4 cell in Table IV has no corresponding defense in Table VIII. 

Research Gap #3 

General Steganographic Communication Detection (L5 ×

T1–T2) 

Colosseum [51] provides a first step for known encoding schemes. A general steganography detector for LLM-generated outputs, capable of detecting novel encoding schemes, does not exist. This is related to the fundamental open problem of detecting statistical anomalies in LLM output distributions, complicated by the high natural variance of LLM outputs. 

Estimated difficulty : Very High (fundamental). Impact : High (covert agent coordination is otherwise undetectable). 

Research Gap #4 

ABOM Standardization and MCP Security Certification (L6 

× T1–T2) 

Despite documented severity of MCP vulnerabilities [13], no security standard or certification program exists for MCP servers. The ABOM concept proposed in this paper has no current standard-ization body. Priority actions: establish an ABOM specification working group (analogous to NTIA SBOM); develop automated tooling for ABOM generation and verification; create a security certification program for MCP servers with mandatory disclosure requirements. 

Estimated difficulty : Medium (standardization). Impact : High (practical near-term risk reduction). 

Research Gap #5 

System-Level Accountability Frameworks (L7 × T1–T4) 

Component-level interpretability cannot explain multi-step agentic trajectories [46]. Required: trajectory-level causal attribution methods; formal verification approaches for agentic planning sequences; and legal/organizational frameworks that assign clear liability for agentic harms across the accountability chain described in Section X. 

Estimated difficulty : High (multi-disciplinary). Impact : Without trajectory-level attribution, deploying agents in healthcare, finance, or critical infrastructure is defensible only by limiting the agent’s action scope to fully reversible operations, which removes the use-case value. 

XIV. F UTURE DIRECTIONS 

A. Formal Security Models for Agentic Protocols 

Cryptographic protocols achieve provable security via formal models (Dolev-Yao, universal composability). Agentic AI lacks analogous formal security models. Developing such models requires: (a) a formal language for specifying agent behavior and security properties; (b) a model of adversary capabilities in the agentic context; and (c) composition theorems allowing security proofs for complex multi-agent systems to be built from component proofs. 

B. Runtime Behavioral Attestation 

A trusted execution environment for agent actions, providing cryptographic attestation that actions were sanctioned by a verified principal hierarchy, would address the accountability gap. Hardware trusted execution environments (Intel TDX, AMD SEV) provide the computational substrate; adapting them to the inference stack of LLM agents (stochastic, large memory footprint, streaming outputs) is a significant engineering challenge. 

C. Temporal Anomaly Detection Infrastructure 

Addressing T3 and T4 threats requires building infrastructure that agents currently lack: (a) persistent, tamper-evident behavioral logs spanning multiple sessions; (b) statistical baselines for normal agent behavior specific to each deployment context; and (c) real-time anomaly scoring that can distinguish malicious behavioral shifts from legitimate adaptation. This is a systems research problem as much as an ML problem. 

D. Multi-Stakeholder Governance Frameworks 

The distributed accountability chain (Section X) requires gov-ernance frameworks spanning developers, operators, users, and regulators. Legal frameworks assigning clear liability for agentic harms, analogous to product liability for physical goods, are an urgent policy priority as agentic AI deployments reach the scale at which harmful incidents become statistically inevitable. 19 

E. Closing the Defense Parity Gap 

LLM agent teams can already autonomously exploit zero-day software vulnerabilities [99]. No analogous defensive capability exists: no agent system can autonomously defend against comparable threats. Developing defensive agents that autonomously detect, analyze, and mitigate attacks against themselves and their deployment environment is a long-term research objective requiring community coordination. 

XV. C OMPARISON WITH EXISTING SURVEYS 

Table X provides a systematic comparison of this survey with the six most closely related prior surveys. 

A. Detailed Comparison 

Wang et al. [14] organize security challenges around four knowl-edge gaps : unpredictability of multi-step inputs, complexity in internal executions, variability of operational environments, and interactions with untrusted external entities. This framing captures the sources of agent uncertainty but does not map to architectural components, making it difficult to derive defense placement decisions. Their coverage ends April 2024, predating MCP security, steganographic collusion benchmarks, and zero-day autonomous exploitation by agent teams. 

Chhabra et al. [15] survey agentic AI security with a focus on evaluation benchmarks and governance frameworks. Their taxonomy distinguishes prompt injection, jailbreaks, autonomous exploitation, and multi-agent threats. Relative to our work, they lack the LASM layer decomposition, the temporality dimension, and detailed treatment of memory layer attacks and ecosystem supply-chain threats. 

Tang et al. [16] propose a structure-aware taxonomy with three paradigms: External Interaction Attacks, Internal Cognitive Attacks, and Multi-Agent Collaboration Attacks. This is the closest in spirit to our layer decomposition, but it conflates L3 (memory) and L4 (tool) within “Internal” attacks and does not separate L6 (ecosystem) from L4. The temporality dimension is absent. 

Lin et al. [44] provide a dedicated survey of agent memory security, the deepest treatment of L3 in the literature. Our work incorporates their taxonomy and extends it by situating L3 threats within the cross-layer context and connecting them to T3 temporality. They do not cover other LASM layers. 

Hou et al. [13] conduct a targeted security analysis of the MCP ecosystem. Their empirical vulnerability statistics are highly cited in our L6 analysis. Their scope is narrower: L6 only, no temporality, no multi-agent or memory analysis. 

MITRE ATLAS [38] and OWASP LLM Top 10 [37] are the most widely deployed practitioner-facing frameworks for AI security. MITRE ATLAS organizes AI attacks by Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs), analogous to MITRE ATT&CK for enterprise systems. OWASP LLM Top 10 enumerates the ten most critical vulnerabilities in LLM applications by exploitability and business impact. These frameworks answer the question “what is the attacker doing?” and are TTP-centric. LASM answers the complementary question: “where in the system architecture is the control point?” The two approaches are orthogonal and mutually reinforcing: an ATLAS technique such as “Prompt Injection” maps to LASM’s L4 layer; “Model Backdoor” maps to L1 and L6. Practitioners can use ATLAS TTPs to identify attacker behaviors and LASM to determine where defenses should be placed. Neither ATLAS nor OWASP LLM Top 10 incorporates a temporal dimension or addresses the higher-layer threats (L5–L7) that this survey identifies as under-studied. Foundational work on security and privacy in ML [58], [144] established the threat taxonomy for classical ML systems; this survey extends that foundation to the agentic setting, where the attack surface encompasses not just the model but the entire reasoning-memory-tool-coordination stack. Collectively, prior work provides deep coverage of individual attack types (ATLAS, OWASP) or individual architectural layers (Lin et al. [44], Hou et al. [13]), but no prior work provides: (a) a unified architectural framework spanning all seven layers with formal layer boundaries; (b) a temporal dimension for classifying when attacks manifest; (c) a cross-layer defense taxonomy covering temporal coverage; or (d) systematic identification of the high-risk, under-studied zone at {L5–L7} × {T3–T4}. 

XVI. C ONCLUSION 

AI agents are deployed in production systems managing enterprise files, executing financial transactions, writing and deploying code, and coordinating complex multi-step workflows on behalf of millions of users. Their security is a societal concern, not merely a technical one. The central argument of this survey is that agentic AI security requires its own analytical framework. Borrowing from stateless LLM safety or traditional software security leaves the most dangerous threats unaddressed. The Layered Attack Surface Model (LASM) 

provides a seven-layer decomposition that assigns each threat class to the architectural component that must defend against it. The attack temporality dimension shows that the threats with the highest real-world impact are not instantaneous attacks at well-studied layers, but slow-burning, high-layer attacks that existing defenses and benchmarks leave unmeasured. Through a systematic review of 94 papers, we documented the state of the art across all seven layers, proposed a cross-layer defense tax-onomy, surveyed evaluation benchmarks and their gaps, and identified five research gaps: Gap 1 (cross-session attack benchmarks), Gap 2 (emergent misalignment detection), Gap 3 (steganographic collusion detection), Gap 4 (ABOM standardization and MCP certification), and Gap 5 (system-level accountability frameworks). Agent security is a distributed systems problem embedded in an adversarial ecosystem, not a model problem, not a prompt problem, and not a challenge amenable to better safety training alone. Of the five gaps identified in Section XIII, Gaps 1, 4, and 5 offer the clearest path to near-term engineering progress; Gaps 2 and 3 have no short-term solution path. 

Gaps 1, 4, 5 (near-term tractable). Gap 1 (multi-session evaluation infrastructure) is prerequisite to measuring progress on all slow-burn threats. Cross-session replay infrastructure, memory state serialization, and ground-truth labeling are engineering problems for which the necessary components already exist; they have not been assembled for the security evaluation use case. Gap 4 (ABOM standardization and MCP security certification) is an engineering coordination problem rather than a research problem, tractable in the near term and with disproportionate risk-reduction value, analogous to how SBOM adoption transformed software supply-chain security after NTIA mandated it. Gap 5 (system-level accountability frameworks) spans formal trajectory attribution, mandatory action logging, and legal liability allocation; it is a prerequisite for deploying agents in high-stakes domains regardless of whether the other gaps are solved. 

Gaps 2 and 3 (fundamental open problems). Emergent misalign-ment detection (Gap 2) and general steganographic collusion detection (Gap 3) have no near-term solution path: both require detecting statistical anomalies in high-dimensional stochastic distributions, and both face adversaries who can adapt to known detection methods. Sustained basic research is required before engineering progress is tractable. The intellectual foundations exist across statistical process control, information theory, formal verification, and distributed systems; the work is their adaptation to the specific distributional and behavioral properties of agentic AI systems. 

Limitations 

This survey has four limitations. First, the corpus was coded by a single author; the conservative ambiguity rule in Section II and the per-cell citations in Table V mitigate but do not replace formal inter-rater reliability assessment, which remains future work. Second, coverage ends April 2025; the field publishes rapidly and some recent work is missing. Third, LASM organizes threats by architectural layer, but agent deployments vary; an agent without persistent memory has no L3 attack surface, and the framework should be applied to the actual deployment configuration. Fourth, the MCP vulnerability statistics 20 

TABLE X: Comparison with related surveys. ( ✓: comprehensive; ◦: partial; —: not covered.) 

Survey Coverage Layer Temp. Mem. MCP/SC Steg. Def. Method. (year) Model Dim. Sec. Supply Collude Tax. 

Wang et al. [14] 2022–2024 — — ◦ — ◦ ◦ ◦

Chhabra et al. [15] 2022–2025 — — ◦ ◦ — ✓ ◦

Tang et al. [16] 2022–2025 ◦ — ◦ — — ✓ ◦

Lin et al. [44] 2022–2025 — ◦ ✓ — — ✓ ◦

Hou et al. [13] 2024–2025 — — — ✓ — ◦ ✓

MITRE ATLAS [38] 2021–2024 — — — ◦ — ✓ ✓

This survey 2021–2025 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

from [13] come from an unreviewed preprint; the directional findings are consistent with independently documented incidents, but the exact percentages are not peer-validated. 

REFERENCES [1] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessì, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, L. Zettle-moyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom, “Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761 ,2023. [2] Y. Qin, S. Liang, Y. Ye, K. Zhu, L. Yan, Y. Lu, Y. Lin, X. Cong, X. Tang, B. Qian et al. , “ToolLLM: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world APIs,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024, arXiv:2307.16789. [3] S. G. Patil, T. Zhang, X. Wang, and J. E. Gonzalez, “Gorilla: Large language model connected with massive APIs,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024, arXiv:2305.15334. [4] Y. Shen, K. Song, X. Tan, D. Li, W. Lu, and Y. Zhuang, “HuggingGPT: Solving AI tasks with ChatGPT and its friends in Hugging Face,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023, arXiv:2303.17580. [5] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 , 2023. [6] G. Wang, Y. Xie, Y. Jiang, A. Mandlekar, C. Xiao, Y. Zhu, L. Fan, and A. Anandkumar, “Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023. [7] S. Gravitas, “AutoGPT: An Autonomous GPT-4 Experiment,” GitHub Repository , 2023, https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT. [8] L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng et al. , “A Survey on Large Language Model Based Autonomous Agents,” Frontiers of Computer Science , vol. 18, 2024. [9] Z. Xi, W. Chen, X. Guo, W. He, Y. Ding, B. Hong, M. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Jin, E. Zhou et al. , “The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864 , 2023. [10] J. Wei, Y. Tay, R. Bommasani et al. , “Emergent abilities of large language models,” Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2022, arXiv:2206.07682. [11] R. Nakano, J. Hilton et al. , “WebGPT: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 ,2022. [12] Z. Niu, H. Liang, F. Zhang, and X. Li, “Agent Smith: A Single Image Can Jailbreak One Million Multimodal LLM Agents Exponentially Fast,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08567 , 2024. [13] X. Hou et al. , “Model Context Protocol (MCP): Landscape, Security Threats, and Future Research Directions,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology , 2025, arXiv:2503.23278. [14] Z. Wang et al. , “AI Agents Under Threat: A Survey of Key Security Challenges and Future Pathways,” ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 182:1–182:38, 2025. [15] A. Chhabra, S. Datta, S. K. Nahin, and P. Mohapatra, “Agentic AI Security: Threats, Defenses, Evaluation, and Open Challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23883 , 2025. [16] Y. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Lan, Z. Yan, and E. Gelenbe, “Security of LLM-based Agents Regarding Attacks, Defenses, and Applications: A Comprehensive Survey,” Information Fusion , vol. 127, 2026. [17] M. J. Page, J. E. McKenzie, P. M. Bossuyt, I. Boutron, T. C. Hoffmann, C. D. Mulrow et al. , “PRISMA 2020 Explanation and Elaboration: Updated Guidance and Exemplars for Reporting Systematic Reviews,” 

BMJ , vol. 372, p. n160, 2021. [18] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz, “Not What You’ve Signed Up For: Compromising Real-World LLM-Integrated Applications with Indirect Prompt Injection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12173 , 2023. [19] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017, arXiv:1706.03762. [20] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) ,2019, pp. 4171–4186, arXiv:1810.04805. [21] T. B. Brown, B. Mann et al. , “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020, arXiv:2005.14165. [22] OpenAI, “GPT-4 Technical Report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 ,2023. [23] Anthropic, “Claude’s Model Card,” 2023, https://www-files.anthropic. com/production/images/model-card-claude-2.pdf. [24] H. Touvron, T. Lavril et al. , “LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023. [25] H. Touvron, L. Martin et al. , “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 , 2023. [26] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. B. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei, “Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017, arXiv:1706.03741. [27] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin 

et al. , “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022, arXiv:2203.02155. [28] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray et al. , “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” in NeurIPS , 2022. [29] Y. Bai, S. Kadavath, S. Kundu, A. Askell, J. Kernion, A. Jones, A. Chen, A. Goldie, A. Mirhoseini, C. McKinnon et al. , “Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 ,2022. [30] R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson et al. , “On the opportunities and risks of foundation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258 , 2021. [31] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022, neurIPS 2022. [32] C. Lam, J. Li, L. Zhang, and K. Zhao, “Governing Evolving Memory in LLM Agents: Risks, Mechanisms, and the Stability and Safety Governed Memory (SSGM) Framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.11768 , 2025. [33] Anthropic, “Claude’s Model Specification,” https://anthropic.com/model-spec, 2024. [34] E. Hubinger et al. , “Sleeper Agents: Training Deceptive LLMs that Persist Through Safety Training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05566 ,2024. [35] Snyk Security Research, “Malicious MCP Server on npm: postmark-mcp Harvests Emails via BCC Injection,” Snyk Security Blog, 2025, published September 2025; package postmark-mcp v1.0.16; first docu-mented malicious MCP server in the wild, exfiltrating email content via BCC injection. URL: snyk.io/blog. [36] N. Maloyan et al. , “Prompt Injection Attacks on Agentic Coding Assistants: A Systematic Analysis of Vulnerabilities in Skills, Tools, 21 

and Protocol Ecosystems,” International Journal of Open Information Technologies , 2025, arXiv:2601.17548. [37] OWASP Foundation, “OWASP Top 10 for Large Language Model Applications 2025,” https://owasp.org/www-project-top-10-for-large-language-model-applications/, 2024. [38] MITRE Corporation, “MITRE ATLAS: Adversarial Threat Landscape for Artificial Intelligence Systems, v4.5,” https://atlas.mitre.org, 2024. [39] W. Zou, R. Geng, B. Wang, and J. Jia, “PoisonedRAG: Knowledge Corruption Attacks to Retrieval-Augmented Generation of Large Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07867 , 2024. [40] A. Zou, Z. Wang, J. Z. Kolter, and M. Fredrikson, “Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Aligned Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043 , 2023. [41] E. Hubinger, C. van Merwijk, V. Mikulik, J. Steen, and S. Garrabrant, “Risks from Learned Optimization in Advanced Machine Learning Systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01820 , 2019. [42] X. Yang, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Petzold, W. Y. Wang, X. Zhao, and D. Lin, “Shadow alignment: The ease of subverting safely-aligned language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02949 , 2023. [43] A. Wan, E. Wallace, S. Shen, and D. Klein, “Poisoning language models during instruction tuning,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2023, arXiv:2305.00944. [44] Z. Lin, C. Li, and K. Chen, “A Survey on the Security of Long-Term Memory in LLM Agents: Toward Mnemonic Sovereignty,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.16548 , 2025. [45] A. Pan, K. Bhatia, and J. Steinhardt, “The Effects of Reward Misspeci-fication: Mapping and Mitigating Misaligned Models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022, iCLR 2022; arXiv:2201.03544. [46] J. Zhu, D. Gandhi, H. Joshi, A. R. Mianroodi, S. A. Kocak, and D. Ra-machandran, “Interpreting Agentic Systems: Beyond Model Explana-tions to System-Level Accountability,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.17168 ,2025. [47] A. Bondarenko et al. , “Demonstrating specification gaming in reasoning models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13295 , 2025. [48] Z. Chen, Z. Xiang, C. Xiao, D. Song, and B. Li, “AgentPoison: Red-teaming LLM agents via poisoning memory or knowledge bases,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024, arXiv:2407.12784. [49] Y. Zhang, Q. Deng, T. Zhao, Z. Li, X. Su, Z. Zhu, H. Zhang, and C. Zhuge, “HijackRAG: Hijacking attacks against retrieval-augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.22832 , 2024. [50] J. Skalse, N. H. R. Howe, D. Krasheninnikov, and D. Krueger, “Defining and characterizing reward hacking,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022, arXiv:2209.13085. [51] M. Nakamura, A. Kumar, S. Das, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mahmud, F. Fioretto, S. Zilberstein, and E. Bagdasarian, “Colosseum: Auditing Collusion in Cooperative Multi-Agent Systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15198 ,2025. [52] Y. Jo, M. Jeong, J. Im, and J. Kang, “Byzantine-robust decentralized coordination of LLM agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.14928 , 2025. [53] J. Weng, Y. Yao, H. Chen, Y. Xie, Z. Li, P. Hu, and D. Gu, “Large language model supply chain: A research agenda,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12736 , 2024. [54] J. Yi, J. Ye, Z. Chen, R. Xiong, M. Xu, J. Li, L. Ma, T. Gui, Q. Zhang, and X. Huang, “Jailbreak and guard aligned language models with only few in-context demonstrations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06387 , 2023. [55] A. Wei, N. Haghtalab, and J. Steinhardt, “Jailbroken: How Does LLM Safety Training Fail?” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023, neurIPS 2023. [56] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. J. Goodfellow, and R. Fergus, “Intriguing properties of neural networks,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2014, arXiv:1312.6199. [57] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 , 2014. [58] B. Biggio and F. Roli, “Wild patterns: Ten years after the rise of adversarial machine learning,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 84, pp. 317– 331, 2018, arXiv:1712.03141. [59] X. Liu, N. Xu, M. Chen, and C. Xiao, “AutoDAN: Generating stealthy jailbreak prompts on aligned large language models,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024, arXiv:2310.04451. [60] P. Chao, A. Robey, E. Dobriban, H. Hassani, G. J. Pappas, and E. Wong, “Jailbreaking black box large language models in twenty queries,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024, arXiv:2310.08419. [61] C. Anil, E. Durmus, M. Sharma, J. Benton, E. Perez, R. Grosse, D. Duvenaud et al. , “Many-Shot Jailbreaking,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024, anthropic Technical Report; also presented at NeurIPS 2024. [62] C. Wu et al. , “Dissecting Adversarial Robustness of Multimodal LM Agents,” in ICLR 2025 , 2025, arXiv:2406.12814. [63] F. Tramèr, F. Zhang, A. Juels, M. K. Reiter, and T. Ristenpart, “Stealing machine learning models via prediction APIs,” in 25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security) , 2016, arXiv:1609.02943. [64] R. Shokri, M. Stronati, C. Song, and V. Shmatikov, “Membership inference attacks against machine learning models,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P) , 2017. [65] N. Carlini, D. Paleka, K. Dvijotham, T. Steinke, J. Hayase, A. F. Cooper, K. Lee, M. Jagielski, M. Nasr, A. Conmy et al. , “Stealing part of a production language model,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024, arXiv:2403.06634. [66] N. Carlini, F. Tramèr, E. Wallace, M. Jagielski, A. Herbert-Voss, K. Lee, A. Roberts, T. Brown, D. Song, Ú. Erlingsson, A. Oprea, and C. Raffel, “Extracting training data from large language models,” in 30th USENIX Security Symposium , 2021, pp. 2633–2650, arXiv:2012.07805. [67] N. Carlini, D. Ippolito, M. Jagielski, K. Lee, F. Tramèr, and C. Zhang, “Quantifying memorization across neural language models,” in In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023, arXiv:2202.07646. [68] M. Nasr, N. Carlini, J. Hayase, M. Jagielski, A. F. Cooper, D. Ippolito, C. A. Choquette-Choo, E. Wallace, F. Tramèr, and K. Lee, “Scalable extraction of training data from (production) language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17035 , 2023. [69] W. Shi, A. Ajith, M. Xia, Y. Huang, D. Liu, T. Blevins, D. Chen, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Detecting pretraining data from large language models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024, arXiv:2310.16789. [70] M. Fredrikson, S. Jha, and T. Ristenpart, “Model inversion attacks that exploit confidence information and basic countermeasures,” in 

Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) , 2015. [71] F. Perez and I. Ribeiro, “Ignore Previous Prompt: Attack Techniques For Language Models,” in EMNLP 2022 Workshop on Trustworthy NLP , 2022. [72] R. Rafailov, A. Sharma, E. Mitchell, C. D. Manning, S. Ermon, and C. Finn, “Direct Preference Optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023, arXiv:2305.18290. [73] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2018, arXiv:1706.06083. [74] J. M. Cohen, E. Rosenfeld, and J. Z. Kolter, “Certified adversarial robustness via randomized smoothing,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2019, arXiv:1902.02918. [75] H. Inan, K. Upasani, J. Chi, R. Rungta, K. Iyer, Y. Mao, M. Tontchev, Q. Hu, B. Fuller, D. Testuggine, and M. Khabsa, “Llama Guard: LLM-based input-output safeguard for human-AI conversations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06674 , 2023. [76] M. Mazeika, L. Phan, X. Yin, A. Zou, Z. Wang, N. Mu, E. Sakhaee, N. Li, S. Basart, B. Li, D. Forsyth, and D. Hendrycks, “HarmBench: A Standardized Evaluation Framework for Automated Red Teaming and Robust Refusal,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04249 , 2024. [77] K. Zhu, J. Wang, J. Zhou, Z. Wang, H. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Yang, W. Ye, N. Z. Gong, Y. Zhang, and X. Xie, “PromptBench: Towards evaluating the robustness of large language models on adversarial prompts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04528 , 2023. [78] D. Ganguli, L. Lovitt, J. Kernion, A. Askell, Y. Bai, S. Kadavath, B. Mann, E. Perez, N. Schiefer, K. Ndousse, A. Jones, S. Bowman 

et al. , “Red teaming language models to reduce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07858 , 2022. [79] E. Perez, S. Huang, F. Song, T. Cai, R. Ring, J. Aslanides, A. Glaese, N. McAleese, and G. Irving, “Red teaming language models with language models,” in Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2022, arXiv:2202.03286. [80] J. Kirchenbauer, J. Geiping, Y. Wen, J. Katz, I. Miers, and T. Goldstein, “A watermark for large language models,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2023, arXiv:2301.10226. [81] M. Abadi, A. Chu, I. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan, I. Mironov, K. Talwar, and L. Zhang, “Deep learning with differential privacy,” 22 

in Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) , 2016. [82] S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. L. Griffiths, Y. Cao, and K. Narasimhan, “Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023, arXiv:2305.10601. [83] A. Madaan, N. Tandon, P. Gupta, S. Hallinan, L. Gao, S. Wiegreffe, U. Alon, N. Dziri, S. Prabhumoye, Y. Yang et al. , “Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023, arXiv:2303.17651. [84] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, E. Berman, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao, “Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023, arXiv:2303.11366. [85] M. Turpin, J. Michael, E. Perez, and S. R. Bowman, “Language models don’t always say what they think: Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023, arXiv:2305.04388. [86] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. Küttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rocktäschel, S. Riedel, and D. Kiela, “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020, arXiv:2005.11401. [87] Y. Gao, Y. Xiong, X. Gao, K. Jia, J. Pan, Y. Bi, Y. Dai, J. Sun, Q. Guo, M. Wang, and H. Wang, “Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 , 2023. [88] C. Packer, S. Wooders, K. Lin, V. Fang, S. G. Patil, I. Stoica, and J. E. Gonzalez, “MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 , 2024. [89] B. Wang, W. He, S. Zeng, Z. Xiang, Y. Xing, J. Tang, and P. He, “Unveiling Privacy Risks in LLM Agent Memory,” in Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2025, pp. 25 241–25 260, arXiv:2502.13172. [90] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz, “Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security (AISec) ,2023, arXiv:2302.12173. [91] J. Liu, Y. Deng, W. Zheng, W. Yao, Y. Jiang, L. Lu, Y. Liu, M. Xue, and S. Zheng, “Prompt injection attacks against LLM-integrated applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05499 , 2023. [92] Y. Liu, Y. Jia, R. Geng, J. Jia, and N. Z. Gong, “Formalizing and benchmarking prompt injection attacks and defenses,” in 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security) , 2024, arXiv:2310.12815. [93] Q. Zhan, Z. Liang, Z. Ying, and D. Kang, “InjecAgent: Benchmarking indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2024, arXiv:2403.02691. [94] H. Zhang, J. Huang, K. Mei, Y. Yao, Z. Wang, C. Zhan, H. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Agent security bench (ASB): Formalizing and benchmarking attacks and defenses in LLM-based agents,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025, arXiv:2410.02644. [95] F. Wu, S. Wu, Y. Cao, and C. Xiao, “WIPI: A new web threat for LLM-driven web agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16965 , 2024. [96] S. Zhou, F. F. Xu, H. Zhu, X. Zhou, R. Lo, A. Sridhar, X. Cheng, T. Ou, Y. Bisk, D. Fried, U. Alon, and G. Neubig, “WebArena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024, arXiv:2307.13854. [97] S. Yao, H. Chen, J. Yang, and K. Narasimhan, “WebShop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022, arXiv:2207.01206. [98] D. Kang et al. , “LLM Agents can Autonomously Exploit One-day Vulnerabilities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08144 , 2024. [99] ——, “Teams of LLM Agents can Exploit Zero-Day Vulnerabilities,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01637 , 2024. [100] D. Kang, X. Li, I. Stoica, C. Guestrin, M. Zaharia, and T. Hashimoto, “Exploiting Novel GPT-4 APIs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14328 , 2023. [101] J. H. Saltzer and M. D. Schroeder, “The protection of information in computer systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 1278–1308, 1975. [102] N. Tran et al. , “Least Privilege for AI Agents: Principles and Imple-mentation Strategies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10452 , 2024. [103] S. Chen, J. Piet, C. Sitawarin, and D. Wagner, “StruQ: Defending against prompt injection with structured queries,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06363 , 2024. [104] S. Gulyamov, S. Gulyamov, A. Rodionov, R. Khursanov, K. Mekhmonov, D. Babaev, and A. Rakhimjonov, “Prompt Injection Attacks in Large Language Models and AI Agent Systems: A Comprehensive Review of Vulnerabilities, Attack Vectors, and Defense Mechanisms,” Information ,vol. 17, no. 1, p. 54, 2026. [105] Y. Ruan, H. Dong, A. Wang, S. Pitis, Y. Zhou, J. Ba, Y. Dubois, C. J. Maddison, and T. Hashimoto, “Identifying the risks of LM agents with an LM-emulated sandbox,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024, arXiv:2309.15817. [106] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, E. Zhu, B. Li, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, and C. Wang, “AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 , 2023. [107] S. Hong, M. Zhuge, J. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Cheng, C. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Wang, S. K. S. Yau, Z. Lin et al. , “MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024, arXiv:2308.00352. [108] C. Qian, W. Liu, H. Liu, N. Chen, Y. Dang, J. Li, C. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Su, X. Cong, J. Xu, D. Li, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “ChatDev: Communicative agents for software development,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2024, arXiv:2307.07924. [109] G. Li, H. A. A. K. Hammoud, H. Itani, D. Khizbullin, and B. Ghanem, “CAMEL: Communicative agents for “mind” exploration of large language model society,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023, arXiv:2303.17760. [110] B. Qiao, L. Li, X. Zhang, S. He, Y. Kang, C. Zhang, F. Yang, H. Dong, J. Zhao, S. Qin et al. , “TaskWeaver: A code-first agent framework,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17541 , 2023. [111] J. S. Park, J. C. O’Brien, C. J. Cai, M. R. Morris, P. Liang, and M. S. Bernstein, “Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03442 , 2023. [112] B. Zhang, J. Tan, Y. Shen, A. Salem, M. Backes, S. Zannettou, and Y. Zhang, “Breaking agents: Compromising autonomous LLM agents through malfunction amplification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.20859 ,2024. [113] Y. Zhang et al. , “Evil Geniuses: Delving into the Safety of LLM-based Agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11855 , 2024. [114] S. R. Motwani, M. Sherburn, G. Yao, J. Hernandez-Orallo, P. Torr, U. Bhatt, T. Maharaj, A. Puli, J. N. Foerster, L. Hammond, and A. P. Kumar, “Secret Collusion among AI Agents: Multi-Agent Deception via Steganography,” in NeurIPS 2024 , 2024, arXiv:2402.07510. [115] L. Lamport, R. Shostak, and M. Pease, “The Byzantine generals problem,” ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems ,vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 382–401, 1982. [116] M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical Byzantine fault tolerance,” in 3rd USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI) , 1999. [117] T. Gu, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. Garg, “BadNets: Identifying vulnera-bilities in the machine learning model supply chain,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06733 , 2017. [118] J. Xue, M. Zheng, T. Hua, Y. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Boloni, and Q. Lou, “TrojLLM: A black-box trojan prompt attack on large language models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023, arXiv:2306.06815. [119] X. Chen, C. Liu, B. Li, K. Lu, and D. Song, “Targeted backdoor attacks on deep learning systems using data poisoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05526 , 2017. [120] Y. Liu, S. Ma, Y. Aafer, W.-C. Lee, J. Zhai, W. Wang, and X. Zhang, “Trojaning attack on neural networks,” in 25th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) , 2018. [121] X. Qi, Y. Zeng, T. Xie, P.-Y. Chen, R. Jia, P. Mittal, and P. Henderson, “Fine-tuning aligned language models compromises safety, even when users do not intend to!” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024, arXiv:2310.03693. [122] H. Pearce, B. Ahmad, B. Tan, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and R. Karri, “Asleep at the keyboard? Assessing the security of GitHub Copilot’s code contributions,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P) ,2022, arXiv:2108.09293. [123] R. Schuster, C. Song, E. Tromer, and V. Shmatikov, “You autocomplete me: Poisoning vulnerabilities in neural code completion,” in 30th USENIX Security Symposium , 2021. [124] H. Aghakhani, W. Dai, A. Manoel, X. Fernandes, A. Kharkar, C. Kruegel, G. Vigna, D. Evans, B. Zorn, and R. Sim, “TrojanPuzzle: Covertly poisoning code-suggestion models,” in 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , 2024, arXiv:2301.02344. 23 

[125] National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), “The minimum elements for a software bill of materials (SBOM),” US Department of Commerce, 2021. [126] OWASP Foundation, “CycloneDX: A full-stack bill of materials standard,” https://cyclonedx.org, 2023, version 1.5; accessed April 2025. [127] Microsoft Open Source, “Agent Governance Toolkit: Open-source Runtime Security for AI Agents,” Microsoft Blog , 2025, published April 2026. URL: opensource.microsoft.com/blog. [128] D. Amodei, C. Olah, J. Steinhardt, P. Christiano, J. Schulman, and D. Mané, “Concrete problems in AI safety,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016. [129] D. Hendrycks, M. Mazeika, and T. Woodside, “An Overview of Catastrophic AI Risks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12001 , 2023. [130] C. Burns, P. Izmailov, J. H. Kirchner, B. Baker, L. Gao, L. Aschen-brenner, Y. Chen, A. Ecoffet, M. Joglekar, J. Leike, I. Sutskever, and J. Wu, “Weak-to-strong generalization: Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024, arXiv:2312.09390. [131] I. Gabriel, “Artificial intelligence, values, and alignment,” Minds and Machines , vol. 30, pp. 411–437, 2020. [132] D. Hadfield-Menell, S. Russell, P. Abbeel, and A. Dragan, “Cooperative inverse reinforcement learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , 2016, arXiv:1606.03137. [133] L. Weidinger, J. Mellor, M. Rauh et al. , “Ethical and social risks of harm from language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359 , 2021. [134] European Parliament, “Regulation (EU) 2024/1689: Artificial Intelli-gence Act,” 2024, official Journal of the European Union. [135] The White House, “Executive order on the safe, secure, and trustworthy development and use of artificial intelligence,” Executive Order 14110, Federal Register Vol. 88 No. 210, 2023. [136] NIST, “Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0),” National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2023. [137] Anthropic, “Anthropic’s responsible scaling policy, version 1.0,” https: //anthropic.com/news/anthropics-responsible-scaling-policy, 2023. [138] P. Liang, R. Bommasani et al. , “Holistic evaluation of language models,” 

Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2022, arXiv:2211.09110. [139] S. Lin, J. Hilton, and O. Evans, “TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human falsehoods,” in Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2022, arXiv:2109.07958. [140] X. Liu, H. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Xu, X. Lei, H. Lai, Y. Gu, H. Ding, K. Men, K. Yang, S. Zhang, X. Deng, A. Zeng, Z. Du, C. Zhang, S. Shen, T. Zhang, Y. Su, J. Tang, J. Yao et al. , “AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as Agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688 , 2023. [141] E. Debenedetti, J. Zhang, M. Balunovic, L. Beurer-Kellner, M. Fischer, and M. Vechev, “AgentDojo: A Dynamic Environment to Evaluate Prompt Injection Attacks and Defenses for LLM Agents,” in Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024, arXiv:2406.13352. [142] S. Zhang et al. , “AgentSecBench: Benchmarking Agent Security Against Prompt Injection and Tool Misuse,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02507 ,2024. [143] J. Nöther, A. Singla, and G. Radanovic, “Benchmarking the Robustness of Agentic Systems to Adversarially-Induced Harms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.16481 , 2025. [144] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, A. Sinha, and M. P. Wellman, “SoK: Security and privacy in machine learning,” in 3rd IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P) , 2018.