Title: MemMachine: A Ground-Truth-Preserving Memory System for Personalized AI Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.04853v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 02:05:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# MemMachine: A Ground-Truth-Preserving Memory System for Personalized AI Agents 

# Shu Wang ∗1, Edwin Yu †1, Oscar Love ‡1, Tom Zhang §1 , Tom Wong ¶1, Steve Scargall ‖1, and Charles Fan ∗∗ 11MemVerge, Inc. March 2026 

# Abstract 

Large language model (LLM) agents require persis-tent memory to maintain personalization, factual con-tinuity, and long-horizon task performance, yet stan-dard context-window and retrieval-augmented gener-ation (RAG) workflows remain brittle under multi-session interactions. We present MemMachine, an open-source memory system that combines short-term mem-ory, long-term episodic memory, and profile memory in a ground-truth-preserving architecture that stores raw conversational episodes and minimizes routine LLM-based extraction. MemMachine introduces contextual-ized retrieval that expands nucleus matches with neigh-boring episode context, improving recall for conversa-tional queries where semantically related evidence is dis-tributed across turns. Across multiple benchmarks, MemMachine demon-strates strong accuracy-efficiency tradeoffs. On Lo-CoMo, it achieves an overall score of 0.9169 with gpt-4.1-mini. On LongMemEval S (ICLR 2025), a systematic ablation study across six optimization dimensions yields 

93.0% overall accuracy, with retrieval-stage optimiza-tions contributing more than ingestion-stage changes: retrieval depth tuning (+4.2%), context formatting (+2.0%), search prompt design (+1.8%), and query bias correction (+1.4%) each outweigh sentence chunk-ing (+0.8%). A surprising finding is that GPT-5-mini outperforms GPT-5 as the answer LLM (+2.6%) when paired with optimized prompts, yielding the most cost-efficient configuration. In matched memory-mode com-parisons, MemMachine uses approximately 80% fewer input tokens than Mem0. We further evaluate a Re-trieval Agent that routes queries to direct retrieval, par-allel decomposition, or iterative chain-of-query strate-

> ∗shu.wang@memverge.com
> †edwin.yu@memverge.com
> ‡oscar.love@memverge.com
> §tom.zhang@memverge.com
> ¶tom.wong@memverge.com
> ‖steve.scargall@memverge.com
> ∗∗ charles.fan@memverge.com

Table 1: Benchmark snapshot (quick overview). De-tailed setup and full breakdowns are provided in later sections.             

> Benchmark Metric Result
> LoCoMo Overall score (gpt-4.1-mini) 91.69%
> LongMemEval SAblation best (gpt-5-mini) 93.0%
> HotpotQA hard Retrieval Agent accuracy 93.2%
> WikiMultiHop †Retrieval Agent accuracy 92.6%
> Mem0 comparison Input token reduction ~80% less
> †Randomized-noise setting.

gies, reaching 93.2% on HotpotQA hard and 92.6% on WikiMultiHop under randomized-noise conditions. These results suggest that preserving episodic ground truth while layering adaptive retrieval strategies yields robust long-term memory behavior for personalized agents. 

# 1 Introduction 

Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) have become the computational foundation for a rapidly growing class of autonomous AI applications, from con-versational assistants and customer-facing agents to complex multi-agent workflows [1, 2]. Despite their broad capabilities, LLMs exhibit two fundamental limi-tations that constrain their utility in persistent, person-alized applications: 1. Static Parameters. Once trained, an LLM’s weights are fixed. The model cannot acquire new knowledge from interactions without costly fine-tuning or re-training. 2. Restricted Context Window. LLMs operate within a finite context window, requiring applications to carefully curate and compress inference data, often at the cost of losing relevant historical context. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [3] has emerged as the dominant paradigm for injecting external knowledge into LLM workflows. However, conventional RAG architectures are designed for static document col-1

> arXiv:2604.04853v1 [cs.AI] 6 Apr 2026

lections and do not support the dynamic, bidirectional interactions characteristic of AI agents that must learn from, and adapt to, evolving user contexts across ses-sions. What AI agents require is a memory system —a mech-anism that goes beyond document retrieval to store, or-ganize, recall, and reason over past experiences. Draw-ing on established models from cognitive science [10, 11], such a system should provide: 

• Short-term memory (STM): An immediate workspace maintaining current context, with limited capacity. 

• Long-term episodic memory: A store of specific past experiences, providing ground truth about what occurred. 

• Semantic memory: High-level summaries, facts, and user profiles distilled from raw experience. 

• Procedural memory: Learned rules, strategies, and action patterns that guide agent behavior. A growing body of systems have begun to address this challenge. MemGPT [1] explored virtual memory management for LLMs. Mem0 [4] and Zep [5] provide long-term memory layers for AI agents. However, these systems primarily rely on LLMs for data extraction, update, aggregation, and deletion—a design that in-troduces high operational cost, accuracy concerns from probabilistic extraction, and compounding error over time. 

# 1.1 Contributions 

In this paper, we present MemMachine , an open-source memory system that takes a fundamentally dif-ferent approach. Our key contributions are: 1. Ground-truth-preserving architecture. Mem-Machine stores raw conversational episodes and in-dexes them at the sentence level, minimizing LLM dependence for routine memory operations and pre-serving factual integrity. 2. Contextualized retrieval. A novel retrieval mech-anism that expands nucleus episodes with neighbor-ing context to form episode clusters, addressing the embedding dissimilarity problem inherent in conver-sational data. 3. Cost-efficient operation. By reserving LLM calls for summarization and high-level abstraction rather than per-message extraction, MemMachine achieves approximately 80% reduction in token usage com-pared to competing systems. 4. Personalization support. A profile memory sys-tem that extracts and maintains user preferences, facts, and behavioral patterns to enable personalized agent interactions across sessions. 5. Leading LoCoMo performance (as of March 2026). MemMachine achieves 0.9169 on LoCoMo with gpt-4.1-mini, among the strongest published re-sults for open memory frameworks and above re-ported Mem0, Zep, Memobase, LangMem, and Ope-nAI baseline scores. 6. LongMemEval S ablation study. A system-atic evaluation on LongMemEval (ICLR 2025) across six optimization dimensions—sentence chunk-ing, query bias correction, context formatting, re-trieval depth, search prompt design, and answer-model selection—achieving 93.0% overall accuracy and revealing that retrieval-stage optimizations dom-inate over ingestion-stage changes. 7. Comprehensive evaluation. We provide repro-ducible benchmark scripts and analyze the impact of embedding models, reranking strategies, LLM model selection, and retrieval parameters on memory per-formance. 8. Retrieval Agent for multi-hop reasoning. An LLM-orchestrated retrieval pipeline that classifies queries into structural types and routes them to purpose-built strategies (direct search, parallel de-composition, or iterative chain-of-query), achieving 93.2% accuracy on the HotpotQA hard set while maintaining bounded cost. MemMachine is released under the Apache 2.0 license and is available at https://github.com/MemMachine/ MemMachine .

# 2 Related Work 

# 2.1 Memory for AI Agents 

The need for persistent memory in LLM-based agents has been recognized across multiple research threads. Hu et al. [9] provide a comprehensive survey organiz-ing agent memory by forms (token-level, parametric, la-tent), functions (factual, experiential, working), and dy-namics (formation, evolution, retrieval). Park et al. [2] demonstrated the power of memory in generative agents that simulate human behavior, using a memory stream architecture with retrieval, reflection, and planning. MemGPT [1] introduced an operating-system-inspired virtual memory hierarchy for LLMs, managing context by paging information between a main context and external storage. While pioneering, MemGPT’s approach requires complex memory management that can introduce latency and depends on LLM-driven decisions for memory operations. 

# 2.2 Existing Memory Systems 

Mem0 [4] provides a production-oriented memory layer that extracts facts from conversations using LLM calls, stores them in hybrid vector and graph databases, and retrieves them for agent inference. While effective, the per-message LLM extraction approach incurs significant cost and can introduce factual drift through accumu-lated extraction errors. 2Zep [5] implements a temporal knowledge graph ar-chitecture that tracks how facts evolve over time, com-bining graph-based memory with vector search. Zep excels at relationship modeling and temporal reasoning but introduces complexity in deployment and configura-tion. 

Memobase 1 and LangMem 2 represent additional approaches, with Memobase providing structured mem-ory storage and LangMem integrating memory into the LangChain ecosystem. More recently, Mastra [15] introduced observational memory , which uses two background agents (Observer and Reflector) to compress conversation history into a dated observation log that stays in context, eliminating retrieval entirely. This approach achieves strong Long-MemEval scores (94.87% with GPT-5-mini) and enables aggressive prompt caching, but trades away the ability to search a broader external corpus—making it less suit-able for open-ended knowledge discovery or compliance-heavy recall use cases where ground truth access is re-quired. 

MemOS [16] takes the most ambitious architectural stance, proposing a full memory operating system that treats memory as a first-class schedulable resource anal-ogous to CPU or storage in traditional operating sys-tems. MemOS unifies three memory types under a sin-gle abstraction called MemCube : plaintext memory (ex-ternally injected text, akin to RAG), activation mem-ory (KV-cache states from inference), and parametric memory (knowledge embedded in model weights, e.g., LoRA adapters). MemCubes carry rich metadata in-cluding provenance, versioning, access policies, and life-cycle state, enabling cross-type transformations—for ex-ample, promoting frequently accessed plaintext into KV-cache templates for faster inference, or distilling stable knowledge into parametric weights. The system imple-ments a three-layer architecture (interface, operation, infrastructure) with a memory scheduler that orches-trates predictive preloading and multi-user session man-agement. On LoCoMo, MemOS reports 75.80 using GPT-4o-mini as the processing LLM, with a claimed 159% improvement in temporal reasoning over OpenAI’s global memory. While MemOS represents a compelling long-term vi-sion—particularly its memory lifecycle governance and cross-type transformation pathways—its scope is sig-nificantly broader than the other systems discussed here. The parametric and activation memory types require direct access to model internals (weights, KV-caches), which limits portability across LLM providers and closed-source APIs. By contrast, MemMachine, Mem0, Zep, and Mastra operate at the application layer , interfacing with LLMs through standard text-based APIs, which enables them to work with any model 

> 1https://github.com/memodb-io/memobase
> 2https://github.com/langchain-ai/langmem

provider without modification. These diverse approaches highlight a fundamental de-sign tension in agent memory: compression vs. preser-vation . Systems that aggressively compress (Mastra, Mem0) achieve smaller context windows and lower per-query cost but risk losing critical detail. Systems that preserve raw data (MemMachine) maintain factual in-tegrity at the cost of requiring efficient retrieval mecha-nisms. A related tension exists between retrieval-based 

approaches (MemMachine, Mem0, Zep) that search se-lectively and context-based approaches (Mastra) that keep compressed history always in context. MemOS introduces a third dimension: memory-layer depth ,spanning from application-level text memory through inference-level activation caching to model-level para-metric adaptation. Table 16 compares these architec-tural choices. 

# 2.3 Memory Benchmarks 

The evaluation landscape for agent memory has matured significantly. LoCoMo [6] evaluates very long-term conversational memory through multi-session dialogues with single-hop, multi-hop, temporal, and open-domain question types. LongMemEval [7] benchmarks five core long-term memory abilities—information ex-traction, multi-session reasoning, temporal reasoning, knowledge updates, and abstention—using scalable chat histories. EpBench [8] focuses on episodic memory evaluation through synthetic narrative corpora ranging from 100K to 1M tokens. 

# 2.4 Memory Types in Cognitive Science 

Our design draws on the established taxonomy from cognitive science. Tulving [10] distinguished episodic memory (memory of specific personal experiences bound to time and place) from semantic memory (general knowledge abstracted from experience). The Atkinson-Shiffrin model [11] formalized the multi-store architec-ture with sensory, short-term, and long-term stores. In the AI agent context, we adopt these distinctions while acknowledging that current implementations approxi-mate rather than replicate human memory processes. 

# 3 Memory Types for AI Agents 

AI agent memory systems draw inspiration from cogni-tive science while adapting to the practical requirements of LLM-based applications. This section describes the primary memory types and their roles, with emphasis on those implemented in MemMachine. 

# 3.1 Episodic Memory 

Episodic memory stores specific past experiences— what 

happened, when , where , and with whom . In the agent 3context, each conversational turn or interaction consti-tutes an episode , a discrete unit of experience with asso-ciated metadata (timestamp, participants, session iden-tifier). Episodic memory serves as ground truth. When an agent needs to recall what a user said, what was decided, or what sequence of events occurred, it queries episodic memory for the raw record. This is essential for factual accuracy, auditability, and trust. 

When to use: Factual recall, reconstructing conver-sation history, answering questions about specific past interactions, providing evidence for decisions, and main-taining conversational continuity across sessions. 

# 3.2 Semantic Memory (Profile Memory) 

Semantic memory stores generalized knowledge ab-stracted from episodic experience—user preferences, facts, behavioral patterns, and stable attributes. In MemMachine, this is implemented as Profile Mem-ory , which extracts and maintains structured user pro-files from conversational data. Unlike episodic memory, which preserves the raw record, semantic/profile memory distills high-level pat-terns: “The user prefers vegetarian restaurants,” “The user works in financial services,” or “The user’s preferred communication style is concise and technical.” 

When to use: Personalization, preference-aware rec-ommendations, adapting tone and content, and provid-ing context that does not require recalling a specific episode. 

# 3.3 Procedural Memory 

Procedural memory encodes learned skills, strategies, and behavioral rules— how to do things. In agent sys-tems, this includes tool-use patterns, workflow steps, and decision heuristics. MemMachine does not currently implement procedural memory, though the architecture can be extended to support it. 

When to use: Multi-step task execution, tool selec-tion, workflow automation, and strategy reuse. 

# 3.4 Temporal Awareness 

While not a separate memory type, temporal aware-ness is a cross-cutting capability. MemMachine tags all episodes with timestamps and supports temporal fil-tering during search, enabling agents to reason about event ordering, recency, and duration. This provides limited but valuable temporal reasoning without requir-ing a dedicated temporal memory module. 

# 3.5 Episodic vs. Semantic: When to Use Each 

The choice between episodic and semantic retrieval de-pends on the query type: Table 2: Episodic vs. Semantic Memory Usage            

> Criterion Episodic Semantic
> Query type Specific past events General prefer-ences Accuracy need Ground truth Approximate Temporal scope Point-in-time Cross-session Data form Raw conversation Extracted facts Example “What did I say about X?” “What foods do I like?”

In practice, effective agents combine both: episodic memory for factual grounding and semantic/profile memory for personalization. 

# 4 MemMachine Architecture 

MemMachine implements a client-server architecture with a two-tier memory system comprising episodic memory (short-term and long-term) and profile memory (semantic). This section describes the system’s compo-nents, data flow, and key design decisions. 

# 4.1 System Overview 

Figure 1 illustrates the high-level architecture. Agents interact with MemMachine through three API inter-faces: a RESTful API (v2), a Python SDK, and a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server. The server man-ages memory processing, while the storage layer per-sists data across PostgreSQL (with pgvector for vector search), SQLite, and Neo4j (for graph-structured long-term memory). 

# 4.2 Data Ingestion 

Raw messages are submitted to MemMachine with metadata. The system organizes each message into an internal data structure called an Episode . Each episode represents one conversational turn and carries required metadata: 

• Producer: The source of the message (user, agent, system). 

• Timestamp: When the message was produced. 

• Session ID: Grouping episodes into conversational sessions. 

• Custom metadata: Arbitrary key-value pairs for domain-specific filtering. Episodes are stored in a central database as a raw data repository and simultaneously dispatched to episodic 4MEMMACHINE       

> Episodic Memory Semantic Memory
> AI Agent Python SDK MCP Server
> REST API Python SDK
> Working Memory
> (short-term)
> Persistent Memory
> (long-term)
> Profile Memory
> SQL Vector Graph
> Databases

Figure 1: MemMachine system architecture. Clients (AI agents, Python SDK, MCP servers) access Mem-Machine through REST API and SDK interfaces. In-ternally, episodic memory comprises working memory (short-term) and persistent memory (long-term), while semantic memory stores user profiles. All memory types are backed by SQL, vector, and graph databases. memory and profile memory for ingestion and indexing. 

# 4.3 Short-Term Memory 

Short-term memory (STM) maintains a configurable context window of the most recent episodes, providing immediate conversational context. Key behaviors: 

• Holds a predefined number of recent episodes. 

• Generates compressed summaries of session-level in-teractions via LLM-based abstraction. 

• When content exceeds the window, both episodes and summaries are compressed for efficient storage and eventually transferred to long-term memory. STM ensures that agents always have access to the immediate conversational context without requiring a retrieval step, while the summarization mechanism pre-serves the gist of older context within the window. 

# 4.4 Long-Term Memory 

Long-term memory (LTM) provides persistent, search-able storage for all episodes that have exited the STM window. The indexing pipeline comprises four stages: 1. Sentence Extraction: Each episode is segmented into individual sentences using NLTK’s Punkt tok-enizer [12]. This fine-grained decomposition enables precise embedding and retrieval at the sentence level rather than the episode level. 2. Metadata Augmentation: Each sentence inherits metadata from its parent episode (timestamp, pro-

> User Query + Filters
> STM Search
> LTM Vector Search
> Contextualization
> De-duplicate Episodes
> Rerank Clusters
> Sort Chronologically
> Return Results

Figure 2: Memory recall workflow. The query passes through STM, LTM vector search, contextualization, deduplication, reranking, and chronological sorting be-fore returning results. ducer, session) and receives a unique identifier. 3. Relational Mapping: Sentences are linked to their originating episodes, maintaining provenance. 4. Embedding Generation: Semantic embeddings are generated for each sentence. MemMachine supports configurable embedding models, enabling domain-specific models for improved performance. The original episodes, augmented sentences, and em-beddings are persisted in the database. Neo4j provides graph-based storage that enables relational traversal, while PostgreSQL with pgvector supports efficient vec-tor similarity search. 

# 4.5 Memory Search and Recall 

Memory search in MemMachine follows a staged re-call pipeline that balances speed, coverage, and factual grounding. The system first checks near-term context, then expands into long-term episodic retrieval, and fi-nally refines candidates before returning results. Fig-ure 2 (Figure 2) summarizes this end-to-end workflow. 

4.5.1 Long-Term Memory Search 

LTM search begins with a vector similarity search using Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) or exact match-ing against the sentence embeddings. Matched sentences are traced back to their originating episodes, with du-plicates removed. The system then applies contextual-ization (Section 4.6). 

4.5.2 Episodic Memory Search 

Episodic search coordinates STM and LTM. It invokes LTM search for episodes outside the STM window, dedu-5plicates overlapping episodes between STM and LTM, sorts all results chronologically to preserve conversa-tional flow, and returns STM episodes, the STM sum-mary, and LTM episodes for agent-driven context as-sembly. 

# 4.6 Contextualization 

A key challenge in conversational memory retrieval is that contextually important episodes may have embed-dings quite dissimilar from the query. Unlike document retrieval in traditional RAG, where each chunk is rel-atively self-contained, conversational turns are highly interdependent. A question about “the restaurant rec-ommendation” requires not just the turn containing the recommendation, but the surrounding turns that estab-lish what was asked, why, and what constraints were given. MemMachine addresses this with contextualized retrieval :1. The nucleus episode is located via embedding search. 2. Immediate neighboring episodes are retrieved (one preceding, two following) to form an episode clus-ter .3. Episode clusters are reranked using a cross-encoder or other reranking model. 4. The top-k clusters are provided for LLM inference. This approach ensures that the LLM receives not just the most semantically similar turns, but the conversa-tional context necessary for accurate reasoning. Our experimental results (Section 8) demonstrate the signif-icant impact of contextualization on benchmark perfor-mance. 

# 4.7 Profile Memory (Semantic Memory) 

Profile memory extracts and maintains user-level facts and preferences from conversational data. Unlike episodic memory, which preserves raw interactions, pro-file memory synthesizes high-level user attributes: 

• Demographic information volunteered by the user. 

• Stated preferences and interests. 

• Behavioral patterns observed across sessions. 

• Professional context and domain expertise. Profile memory is stored in SQL databases (Post-greSQL or SQLite) and supports both retrieval and up-date operations. When new information contradicts ex-isting profile data, the system can update the profile to reflect the most recent state—supporting the knowl-edge update capability evaluated in benchmarks such as LongMemEval [7]. 

# 4.8 Multi-Tenancy and Isolation 

MemMachine implements project-based names-pace isolation. Each project is identified by an 

org_id/project_id pair and maintains separate mem-ory instances. Sessions are further isolated by user_id ,

agent_id , and session_id , enabling multi-tenant de-ployments where multiple users and agents operate with fully isolated memory stores. 

# 5 Retrieval Agent 

MemMachine’s baseline retrieval mechanism—vector similarity search with optional reranking—performs well on single-hop queries where the answer resides in a sin-gle episode cluster. However, production AI agents rou-tinely encounter queries that require multi-hop reason-ing , multi-entity fan-out , or cross-referential dependency chains . For such queries, a single embedding cannot capture all the information needed because intermedi-ate entities are unknown at query time. We call this the 

late binding problem : the correct query for a later retrieval hop cannot be formulated until an earlier hop has been resolved. To address this, MemMachine v0.3 introduces the Re-trieval Agent —an opt-in, LLM-orchestrated retrieval pipeline that routes queries to purpose-built strate-gies while maintaining bounded cost and latency. The Retrieval Agent augments (not replaces) the baseline search: callers who do not enable agent mode experi-ence zero behavioral change. 

# 5.1 The Late Binding Problem 

Consider a multi-hop query: “What is the current em-ployer of the spouse of the CEO of Acme?” Answering this requires three ordered resolution steps: (1) identify the CEO of Acme → Person X, (2) identify the spouse of Person X → Person Y, (3) identify the employer of Per-son Y → Company Z. At query time, only the original query string is available. Its embedding clusters around surface terms (“Acme,” “CEO,” “company”) and has no path to Company Z because the intermediate entities are unknown. This is not a limitation of the embedding model—it is a structural property of information depen-dencies in multi-hop chains that no single-shot vector retrieval can resolve. Existing mitigation strategies—query expansion (HyDE), BM25 hybrid search, chunk-level rerank-ing—improve single-hop recall but cannot resolve dependency chains because they still operate on asingle query formulation. Knowledge graph traversal solves late binding exactly but requires prior graph construction, which is expensive and lossy for arbitrary conversational content. 

# 5.2 Architecture 

The Retrieval Agent is implemented as a composable tool tree assembled inside MemMachine’s long-term memory module. Figure 3 shows the architecture: a6ToolSelectAgent 

> (LLM query router)
> ChainOfQuery Agent
> (multi-hop)
> SplitQuery Agent
> (fan-out)
> MemMachine Agent
> (direct)
> DeclarativeMemory
> (vector search + reranker)
> routes to exactly one

Figure 3: Retrieval Agent tool tree. The ToolSelectA-gent classifies each query and routes it to one of three strategies. All strategies ultimately delegate to the same declarative memory search, ensuring that index and reranker improvements propagate automatically. root router dispatches each query to exactly one of three strategy nodes, all of which ultimately delegate to the same declarative memory search. 

Design principles. All three strategy nodes dele-gate to the same MemMachine leaf, ensuring that im-provements to the underlying vector search propagate automatically to all strategies. The tree is constructed once at startup and cached; routing decisions are made per-query at inference time. Agent mode is enabled via a single flag ( agent_mode=true ), with zero behav-ioral change to existing callers. Each node exposes ad-visory cost properties ( accuracy_score , token_cost ,

time_cost ) for future budget-aware routing. 

# 5.3 Query Routing 

The ToolSelectAgent (root node) uses a single LLM call to classify each incoming query into one of three structural types: 

• Multi-hop dependency chain: Two or more se-quentially dependent retrieval steps where a later step requires the result of an earlier one. Routed to 

ChainOfQuery .

• Single-hop multi-entity: Multiple independent subjects answerable via parallel lookups with no inter-dependency. Routed to SplitQuery .

• Single-hop direct: Single subject, single lookup, no decomposition needed. Routed to MemMachine (base-line search with only the routing overhead). The classification prompt uses embedded calibration examples and a tie-breaker rule: if any explicit depen-dency chain exists, classify as multi-hop even if multi-ple entities appear. This conservative bias trades extra LLM calls for higher recall completeness. We further tuned Retrieval Agent prompts using the APO (Auto Prompt Optimization) algorithm from Agent Lightning [18], using the Microsoft APO imple-mentation 3. In our internal ablations, tuning only the fi-

> 3https://microsoft.github.io/agent-lightning/latest/ algorithm-zoo/apo/

nal answer prompt improved accuracy by approximately 4% (with baseline prompt quality also improving), while jointly tuning all agent prompts improved accuracy by approximately 6%. We do not perform live tuning at inference time, so these gains add no runtime token or latency overhead. 

# 5.4 Strategy Details 

ChainOfQuery implements iterative evidence accumu-lation for dependency chains. It executes up to 3 itera-tions, each consisting of: (1) retrieval against the current query, (2) a combined sufficiency judgment and query rewrite via a single LLM call, and (3) evidence accumu-lation. The sufficiency prompt enforces evidence-only judgment (no external knowledge), strict completeness standards, entity grounding (rewrites use only entities present in retrieved evidence), and calibrated confidence scoring with early stopping at ≥ 0.8 confidence. This de-sign, grounded in the prompt engineering methodology of Luo et al. [18], formalizes forward-chaining multi-hop reasoning with bounded cost. 

SplitQuery addresses fan-out queries by decompos-ing them into 2–6 independent sub-queries via a sin-gle LLM call, executing all sub-queries concurrently via asyncio.gather() , and pooling the results. The decomposition prompt enforces structural constraints: sub-queries must each be answerable by a single fact lookup, derived operations (compare, rank, difference) are prohibited, and a conservative tie-breaker defaults to no-split when ambiguous. 

MemMachine is the direct retrieval leaf that calls DeclarativeMemory.search_scored() without any query transformation. It serves both as the leaf primitive for other agents’ child calls and as the strategy for simple single-hop queries, where agent mode incurs only one routing LLM call overhead. 

# 5.5 Multi-Query Reranking 

A key innovation in agent mode is multi-query reranking : the final reranker receives a concatenation of all queries used during retrieval (original query plus all rewrites or sub-queries), not just the original. This ensures that episodes relevant to any step in the retrieval chain—including intermediate facts that are critical for multi-hop reasoning but not directly referenced in the original query—score well in the final ranking. 

# 5.6 Benchmark Results 

We evaluate the Retrieval Agent across five benchmarks, comparing three modes: Baseline (LLM with full con-text, no memory), MemMachine (declarative mem-ory search), and Retrieval Agent (agent-orchestrated search). Table 3 summarizes accuracy and recall across all benchmarks. 7Table 3: Retrieval Agent benchmark results across five datasets. Accuracy is LLM-judge score; Recall measures gold supporting fact retrieval. Best result per benchmark in bold . All MemMachine and Agent results use surrounding episodes enabled unless noted.                                                           

> Benchmark Questions Answer LLM MemMachine Retrieval Agent Baseline
> Acc. Recall Acc. Recall Acc. LoCoMo 1,540 gpt-5-mini 90.5% 82.2% 90.2% 82.5% 91.7% WikiMultiHop 500 gpt-4.1-mini 88.8% 90.8% 90.0% 92.5% 96.7% WikiMultiHop †500 gpt-5-mini 87.4% 91.7% 92.6% 83.3% 96.7% MRCR 300 gpt-5.2 79.6% 99.1% 81.4% 99.4% 32.3% EpBench 546 gpt-5-mini 73.4% 66.1% 71.8% 65.3% 77.5% EpBench 546 gpt-4o-mini 71.4% 67.9% 73.3% 69.7% 50.1% HotpotQA 500 gpt-5-mini 91.2% 91.0% 93.2% 95.5% 93.0%
> †WikiMultiHop fully randomized cross-question noise injection; all others with content in order.

Table 4: HotpotQA hard set: per-tool performance breakdown for the Retrieval Agent (n=500, gpt-5-mini).                

> Tool Questions Accuracy Recall
> MemMachine 201 93.53% 89.31% SplitQuery 118 94.07% 92.83% ChainOfQuery 181 92.27% 95.31%
> Overall (Agent) 500 93.20% 92.31%

HotpotQA provides the clearest demonstration of the Retrieval Agent’s value. On the hard validation set (500 questions), the agent achieves 93.2% overall accu-racy and 92.31% gold-supporting-fact recall, compared to 91.2% accuracy and 90.98% recall for baseline Mem-Machine—a +2.0 and +1.3 percentage point improve-ment respectively. The per-tool breakdown (Table 4) shows that ChainOfQuery achieves the highest recall (95.31%) on multi-hop bridge questions, validating the iterative evidence accumulation strategy. 

WikiMultiHop demonstrates the benefit of agent orchestration under realistic noise conditions. When all question contexts are pooled into a single shared episodic store with fully randomized order-ing—simulating a production setting where relevant and irrelevant memories are interleaved—the Retrieval Agent with gpt-5-mini achieves 92.6% accuracy vs. 87.4% for baseline MemMachine, a +5.2 point improve-ment. 

MRCR (Multi-Round Co-reference Resolution) shows consistent agent improvement: 81.4% vs. 79.6% for MemMachine, with near-perfect recall (99.4%). No-tably, the LLM baseline without memory scores only 32.3%, demonstrating that co-reference resolution fun-damentally requires memory retrieval. 

LoCoMo shows comparable performance between MemMachine (90.5%) and the Retrieval Agent (90.2%). This is expected: LoCoMo is predominantly single-hop conversational questions where baseline vector search is already effective, and the agent’s routing overhead pro-Table 5: Average token cost per question by Retrieval Agent strategy (HotpotQA hard set).           

> Component Input Tokens Output Tokens
> ToolSelect (router) 1,049 195 ChainOfQuery 2,874 1,614 SplitQuery 1,229 435 MemMachine 00

vides minimal benefit. 

EpBench results are mixed and benchmark-dependent. With gpt-4o-mini as the answer model, the Retrieval Agent improves over baseline MemMachine (73.3% vs. 71.4%). With gpt-5-mini, baseline MemMa-chine slightly outperforms (73.4% vs. 71.8%), suggesting model-prompt sensitivity. 

# 5.7 Token Cost Analysis 

The Retrieval Agent’s improved recall comes at the cost of additional LLM calls for routing and strategy exe-cution. Table 5 shows the per-strategy token cost on HotpotQA. For the 36% of queries routed directly to MemMachine ,the total agent overhead is only the routing call (∼1,244 tokens). For multi-hop queries routed to 

ChainOfQuery , total cost reaches ∼5,732 tokens per question—substantially more, but bounded by the 3-iteration limit. This bounded cost profile is a deliber-ate improvement over the predecessor unbounded agent loop (OpenAI Agents SDK with max_turns=30 ), which was retired in favor of architecturally-defined retrieval strategies. 

# 5.8 When to Use Agent Mode 

Agent mode is not universally beneficial. Table 6 pro-vides deployment guidance based on query characteris-tics. The system is designed for seamless coexistence: 8Table 6: Decision guidance for enabling agent mode.                       

> Use Agent Mode When. . . Best fit Queries involve multi-hop reasoning, co-reference resolution, or multi-entity fan-out. Accuracy is prioritized over latency. Use cases include research assistants, compliance review, and complex QA.
> Not needed Queries are predomi-nantly single-hop fac-tual lookups. Latency requirements are strict (<200ms). Token bud-get is constrained. Use cases include simple chatbot recall, prefer-ence lookup, and ses-sion context.

agent mode is enabled per-query via a single flag, and the router itself filters simple queries to the zero-overhead direct path. In production, applications can enable agent mode selectively based on query complex-ity heuristics or always-on with acceptable overhead for the majority of single-hop queries that route directly. 

# 5.9 OpenClaw Integration 

The Retrieval Agent is also available through Open-Claw 4, an open-source AI agent framework. The MemMachine OpenClaw integration is implemented as a standard plugin using the OpenClaw Plugin SDK (openclaw/plugin-sdk ), not OpenClaw “agent mode.” Concretely, the plugin imports SDK types and ex-poses the canonical plugin object with register(api: OpenClawPluginApi) , where lifecycle hooks and tool registrations connect MemMachine capabilities to the host application. Through this plugin interface, appli-cations can use both declarative memory search and Retrieval Agent orchestration via a unified tool sur-face. Benchmark results in Table 3 include OpenClaw-based evaluation configurations, demonstrating that the Retrieval Agent’s benefits transfer across agent frameworks—not just MemMachine’s native evaluation harness. 

> 4https://github.com/openclaw

# 6 LLM Integration and Model Impact 

# 6.1 How LLMs Are Used in MemMa-chine 

A distinguishing design principle of MemMachine is that LLMs are used sparingly and strategically, rather than for every memory operation. Specifically, LLMs serve three functions: 1. STM Summarization: When the short-term mem-ory window overflows, an LLM generates a com-pressed summary of the session context. 2. Profile Extraction: An LLM extracts structured user facts and preferences from conversational data for profile memory. 3. Agent-Mode Inference: When operating in agent mode, the eval-LLM can iteratively query MemMa-chine’s memory as a tool to formulate responses. Critically, LLMs are not used for per-message fact extraction, memory deduplication, or routine memory management—operations that in competing systems ac-count for the majority of LLM token consumption. 

# 6.2 Impact of Model Choice on Perfor-mance 

The choice of LLM significantly affects both benchmark performance and operational cost. Table 7 summarizes the impact of eval-LLM selection on LoCoMo scores. Table 7: Impact of eval-LLM on MemMachine v0.2 Lo-CoMo scores.           

> Configuration LLM Score Mode
> gpt-4.1-mini (agent) 0.9169 Agent gpt-4.1-mini (memory) 0.9123 Memory gpt-4o-mini (agent) 0.8812 Agent gpt-4o-mini (memory) 0.8747 Memory

The transition from gpt-4o-mini to gpt-4.1-mini yields a 3–4 percentage point improvement across both modes, demonstrating that newer LLM generations improve memory-augmented reasoning without any changes to the memory system itself. This also suggests that Mem-Machine’s architecture is LLM-agnostic —performance improvements in the underlying model translate directly to improved memory-augmented agent behavior. 

# 6.3 Cost Considerations 

Token usage is a primary cost driver for LLM-based ap-plications. MemMachine’s architecture substantially re-duces token consumption: 9Table 8: Token usage comparison on LoCoMo (gpt-4.1-mini).       

> System Input Tokens Output Tokens
> MemMachine v0.2 (mem-ory) 4.20M 43,169 MemMachine v0.2 (agent) 8.57M 93,210 Mem0 main/HEAD (memory) 19.21M 14,840

MemMachine uses approximately 78% fewer input to-kens than Mem0 in memory mode, translating directly to lower inference cost and reduced time-to-first-token latency. 

# 6.4 Context Window Considerations 

A natural question is whether memory systems pro-vide benefit when conversational content fits entirely within the LLM’s context window. Evidence from the LoCoMo benchmark suggests that even for con-versations within context window limits (16K–26K to-kens), memory-augmented systems outperform raw full-context baselines [6]. This is because: 

• Full-context approaches suffer from the “lost in the middle” effect [13], where information in the middle of long contexts is poorly attended. 

• Memory systems provide selective retrieval , surfac-ing only the most relevant episodes rather than over-whelming the model with full conversation history. 

• As conversations grow beyond context limits, mem-ory systems become essential rather than merely ben-eficial. 

# 7 Experimental Setup 

# 7.1 Benchmarks 

We evaluate MemMachine on the following benchmarks: 

LoCoMo [6]: Evaluates very long-term conversa-tional memory across four question categories: single-hop (841 questions), multi-hop (282), temporal reason-ing (321), and open-domain (96). Total: 1,540 scored questions (the 446 adversarial questions are excluded from scoring per standard practice). The evaluation code is based on Mem0’s published evaluation frame-work. 5

LongMemEval S [7]: Benchmarks five core long-term memory abilities—single-session information ex-traction (user-stated facts, assistant-stated facts, and preference inference), temporal reasoning, knowledge updates, and multi-session reasoning—using 500 cu-

> 5https://github.com/mem0ai/mem0/tree/main/evaluation

rated questions embedded in chat histories of approx-imately 115k tokens each. We ingest the benchmark’s chat histories session-by-session, then answer each ques-tion using MemMachine’s memory search API. Evalua-tion uses the question-specific judge prompts provided by the LongMemEval framework. We conduct a system-atic ablation study across 12 configurations varying six optimization dimensions. 

# 7.2 Evaluation Metrics 

For LoCoMo, we report three metrics: 

• LLM Judge Score ( llm_score ): A binary score (0 or 1) assigned by a judge-LLM comparing the sys-tem’s answer to ground truth. The overall score is the weighted mean across categories. 

• BLEU Score: n-gram overlap with reference an-swers. 

• F1 Score: Token-level precision and recall against reference answers. The primary metric for comparison is the llm_score ,as it best captures semantic equivalence between gener-ated and reference answers. For LongMemEval S, we report the llm_score per question category and overall, using the benchmark’s standard LLM-judge evaluation with GPT-4o-mini as judge. 

# 7.3 System Environment 

Table 9: Benchmark test environment.                

> Component Specification
> Operating Sys-tem Ubuntu 24.04 LTS CPU 8 vCPUs RAM 16 GiB GPU Not required (CPU-only runs) Python Version 3.11 MemMachine Version v0.3.x Database PostgreSQL + Neo4j Embedding Model OpenAI text-embedding-3-small Reranker AWS Cohere rerank-v3-5:0 Eval-LLM OpenAI gpt-4o-mini / gpt-4.1-mini / gpt-5 / gpt-5-mini Judge-LLM OpenAI gpt-4o-mini

# 7.4 Compared Systems 

We compare MemMachine against the following systems using publicly reported results: 

• Mem0 [4]: Tested with Mem0 main/HEAD and re-10 run with gpt-4.1-mini for fair comparison. 

• Zep [5]: Results sourced from Zep’s published evalu-ation. 

• Memobase : Results sourced from Memobase’s pub-lished benchmark. 

• LangMem : Results from Mem0’s comparative eval-uation. 

• OpenAI baseline : ChatGPT’s native memory. 

# 7.5 Reproducibility 

All benchmark scripts, configuration files, and run in-structions are available in the MemMachine repository under evaluation/ .6 For reproducible reporting, we recommend pinning a repository tag or commit hash, recording model versions and API provider settings, and saving raw per-question outputs used for score aggrega-tion. Researchers can reproduce our results with their own hardware and API keys. 

# 8 Results and Analysis 

# 8.1 LoCoMo Benchmark Results 

Table 10 presents the comprehensive LoCoMo results for MemMachine v0.2 across both LLM configurations and both operating modes. 

# 8.2 Comparative Analysis 

Table 11 compares MemMachine against competing sys-tems on LoCoMo. In our LoCoMo comparison setting, MemMachine achieves the highest overall score by +9.7 points over the next-best system (Memobase). Key observations: 

• Single-hop (0.9465): MemMachine’s sentence-level indexing and ground truth preservation enable excep-tional factual recall. 

• Multi-hop (0.8759): The contextualization mech-anism allows linking related information across ses-sions. 

• Temporal (0.7352): Competitive but trailing Memobase (0.8505), suggesting room for improve-ment in temporal reasoning—likely addressable through enhanced timestamp-aware retrieval. 

• Open-domain (0.7083): Strong performance con-sidering that episodic memory is optimized for user-centric rather than world-knowledge queries. With gpt-4.1-mini, MemMachine’s temporal score im-proves to 0.9159 in agent mode, suggesting that eval-model capability is a major factor in temporal reasoning outcomes. 

> 6https://github.com/MemMachine/MemMachine/tree/main/ evaluation

# 8.3 Efficiency Analysis 

Beyond accuracy, MemMachine demonstrates substan-tial efficiency advantages: 

• Token Reduction: ∼80% fewer input tokens than Mem0, directly reducing API costs. 

• Memory Add Speed: ∼75% faster than previous versions, enabling real-time ingestion. 

• Search Speed: Up to 75% faster search operations, reducing end-to-end response latency. 

# 8.4 LongMemEval S Ablation Study 

We evaluate MemMachine on the full LongMemEval S

benchmark ( n = 500 questions) through a systematic ablation study across six optimization dimensions: sen-tence chunking, user-query bias correction, context for-matting, retrieval depth ( k), search prompt design, and answer-model selection. Each dimension is evaluated by comparing configuration pairs that differ in exactly one variable. Table 12 summarizes the key configurations; Table 13 isolates the contribution of each optimization. 

8.4.1 Retrieval Depth ( k)

The most impactful single parameter is the number of retrieved episodes. Increasing k from 20 to 30 yields the largest improvement: +4.2 percentage points (C6: 0.870 → C7: 0.912). However, further increases show diminishing or negative returns: k = 50 drops to 0.890, 

worse than k = 30 .This non-monotonic behavior reflects a tension be-tween recall and noise. At k = 20 , the retrieval window misses some relevant episodes, particularly for multi-hop questions requiring evidence from multiple sessions. At 

k = 30 , sufficient evidence is captured without over-whelming the answer LLM with distractors. At k = 50 ,additional episodes introduce irrelevant context that de-grades reading comprehension, consistent with the “lost in the middle” phenomenon [13]. Notably, this k-sensitivity is model-dependent. With GPT-5-mini (C12–C15), performance improves mono-tonically from k = 20 (0.922) through k = 50 (0.928) to k = 100 (0.930), though with diminishing marginal gains. This suggests GPT-5-mini is more robust to dis-tractor context than GPT-5, possibly due to differences in attention mechanisms or instruction-following behav-ior at high context lengths. 

8.4.2 User-Query Bias Correction 

We observe that MemMachine’s search results can ex-hibit a bias toward retrieving assistant messages over user messages. Assistant messages are typically longer with more sentences and therefore more embedding keys, while user messages are shorter but often contain first-hand factual statements with higher informational value for recall tasks. Prepending the prefix "user:" to the search query shifts retrieval toward user messages, 11 Table 10: MemMachine v0.2 LoCoMo results by category (LLM Judge Score).                               

> Eval-LLM Mode Multi-hop Temporal Open-domain Single-hop Overall
> gpt-4.1-mini Agent 0.8830 0.9159 0.7188 0.9512 0.9169
> gpt-4.1-mini Memory 0.8972 0.8910 0.7500 0.9441 0.9123 gpt-4o-mini Agent 0.8404 0.8069 0.7396 0.9394 0.8812 gpt-4o-mini Memory 0.8759 0.7352 0.7083 0.9465 0.8747

Table 11: LoCoMo benchmark comparison across AI agent memory systems (LLM Judge Score). MemMachine results are with gpt-4o-mini for fair comparison with published baselines; gpt-4.1-mini results shown separately in Table 10.                                    

> System Single-hop Temporal Multi-hop Open-domain Overall MemMachine v0.2 0.9465 0.7352 0.8759 0.7083 0.8747
> Memobase (v0.0.37) 0.7092 0.8505 0.4688 0.7717 0.7578 Zep 0.7411 0.7979 0.6604 0.6771 0.7514 Mem0 0.6713 0.5551 0.5115 0.7293 0.6688 LangMem 0.6223 0.2343 0.4792 0.7112 0.5810 OpenAI 0.6379 0.2171 0.4292 0.6229 0.5290

yielding +1.4% (C5: 0.855 → C6: 0.870). 

8.4.3 Context Formatting 

The format in which retrieved messages are presented to the answer LLM significantly affects comprehension. A naive approach concatenating all messages with car-riage returns produces a wall of text. Using \n as line terminators within a message while using actual carriage returns to separate messages improves the LLM’s ability to parse message boundaries, yielding +2.0%. 

8.4.4 Sentence Chunking 

MemMachine’s sentence-level chunking creates one em-bedding key per sentence rather than per message, pro-ducing finer-grained index entries. Enabling chunking yields +0.8% (C6: 0.870 → C9: 0.878), a modest but consistent gain. The relatively small effect suggests that sentence-level granularity primarily helps on questions where the relevant information is a single sentence em-bedded within a longer message. 

8.4.5 Search Prompt Design 

We evaluate three search prompt variants (Edwin1, Ed-win2, Edwin3) with increasing refinement. Edwin3 yields +1.8% over Edwin1 (C9: 0.878 → C11: 0.896), demonstrating that the framing of the search query— not just the retrieval algorithm—materially affects recall quality. 

8.4.6 Answer LLM Selection 

A surprising finding is that GPT-5-mini outper-forms GPT-5 as the answer LLM by +2.6% (C11: 0.896 → C12: 0.922). The advantage persists across re-trieval depths: at k = 30 , GPT-5-mini achieves 0.916 vs. GPT-5’s 0.902; at k = 50 , 0.928 vs. 0.914. We attribute this to the interaction between prompt de-sign and model architecture. The Edwin3 prompt is a direct, concise instruction without chain-of-thought scaffolding, which aligns with GPT-5-mini’s stream-lined instruction-following. Conversely, GPT-5’s built-in reasoning may interfere when given explicit reason-ing instructions. Since GPT-5-mini is also substantially cheaper per token, the best configuration is the most cost-efficient. 

8.4.7 Per-Category Analysis 

Table 14 presents per-category scores for selected con-figurations. Several patterns emerge. Single-session extraction 

(SSU, SSA) is nearly saturated: most configurations achieve 0.98–1.00, indicating that sentence-level index-ing is well-suited for recalling specific facts from individ-ual sessions. Single-session preference (SSP) shows the most dramatic improvement, rising from 0.700 (C5) to 0.933 (C12–C15). Preference questions require infer-ring user preferences from indirect cues, which benefits from both better retrieval and better answer models. 

Temporal reasoning (TR) improves steadily with re-trieval depth and prompt optimization, from 0.798 (C5) to 0.932 (C14), as retrieving more context helps estab-lish temporal relationships. Multi-session reasoning 

(MS) remains the most challenging category, peaking at 0.872 (C15, k=100), since synthesizing information across sessions requires the broadest retrieval window. 

8.4.8 Token Cost–Accuracy Tradeoff 

Retrieval depth directly affects token consumption. Ta-ble 15 shows the cost profile for selected configurations. The Pareto-optimal configuration is C12 (GPT-5-mini, k=20): it achieves 0.922 with only 2.58M input 12 Table 12: LongMemEval S configuration matrix ( n = 500 questions per run). “Chunk” = sentence-level chunking enabled; “User-Q” = user-role query prefix; “JSON-str” = structured message formatting; “Edwin{1,3}” = search prompt variants of increasing refinement.                                                                                            

> ID Answer LLM Chunk User-Q JSON-str Prompt top_ kLLM Score
> C5 GPT-5 ——✓Edwin1 20 0.855 C6 GPT-5 —✓✓Edwin1 20 0.870 C7 GPT-5 —✓✓Edwin1 30 0.912 C8 GPT-5 —✓✓Edwin1 50 0.890 C9 GPT-5 ✓✓✓Edwin1 20 0.878 C11 GPT-5 ✓✓✓Edwin3 20 0.896 C12 GPT-5-mini ✓✓✓Edwin3 20 0.922 C13 GPT-5-mini ✓✓✓Edwin3 30 0.916 C14 GPT-5-mini ✓✓✓Edwin3 50 0.928 C15 GPT-5-mini ✓✓✓Edwin3 100 0.930
> C16 GPT-5 ✓✓✓Edwin3 30 0.902 C17 GPT-5 ✓✓✓Edwin3 50 0.914

Table 13: LongMemEval S ablation: contribution of each optimization to overall LLM score, measured by compar-ing configuration pairs that differ in one variable.                      

> Optimization Comparison ∆Score
> Retrieval-stage optimizations
> Retrieval depth ( k: 20 →30) C6 vs. C7 +4.2% Context formatting (JSON-str) C4 vs. C5 +2.0% Search prompt (Edwin1 →3) C9 vs. C11 +1.8% COT →simple prompt (GPT-5) C1 vs. C4 +1.6% User-query bias correction C5 vs. C6 +1.4%
> Ingestion-stage optimization
> Sentence chunking C6 vs. C9 +0.8%
> Model selection
> GPT-5 →GPT-5-mini C11 vs. C12 +2.6%

tokens, outperforming C7 (GPT-5, k=30, 0.912) which requires 4.03M tokens. Reaching the peak score of 0.930 (C15) requires 3.8× the input tokens of C12 for only +0.8% accuracy. 

# 9 Discussion 

# 9.1 Retrieval Stage Dominates Accu-racy 

Our LongMemEval ablation reveals that retrieval-stage optimizations contribute substantially more to final ac-curacy than ingestion-stage changes. The cumulative effect of retrieval-side improvements (retrieval depth: +4.2%, formatting: +2.0%, search prompt: +1.8%, COT removal: +1.6%, user-query bias: +1.4%) far ex-ceeds the ingestion-side contribution of sentence chunk-ing (+0.8%). This suggests that for memory systems, 

how data is recalled matters more than how it is stored, provided the storage preserves ground truth. This has architectural implications: systems that in-vest heavily in LLM-based ingestion (extracting facts, building knowledge graphs) may be over-optimizing the wrong stage. MemMachine’s approach of storing raw data with lightweight indexing and investing in retrieval quality appears to be more effective per unit of engi-neering effort. 

# 9.2 Model–Prompt Co-optimization 

The GPT-5-mini result on LongMemEval highlights that model selection and prompt design must be co-optimized. A chain-of-thought prompt designed for GPT-4.x is suboptimal for GPT-5, and a simple di-rect prompt can outperform a complex one when paired with the right model. The advantage persists across retrieval depths (GPT-5-mini beats GPT-5 by +1.4% at k=30 and k=50). This argues against the com-mon practice of reusing prompts across model upgrades, and suggests that memory system deployments should re-evaluate prompts whenever the underlying answer model changes. 

# 9.3 The Role of Personalization 

Personalization is perhaps the most compelling reason for AI agent memory. Without memory, every interac-tion starts from zero—the agent has no awareness of the user’s history, preferences, or context. Memory trans-forms a generic LLM into a personalized assistant that adapts to individual users over time. MemMachine’s dual memory architecture directly supports personalization: episodic memory provides the factual grounding for “what happened,” while profile memory captures the distilled “who the user is.” This combination enables agents to: 

• Maintain continuity across sessions without requiring users to repeat context. 

• Adapt responses to user preferences, communication 13 Table 14: LongMemEval S per-category LLM scores for selected configurations ( n = 500 ). SSU = single-session-user, SSP = single-session-preference, SSA = single-session-assistant, TR = temporal reasoning, KU = knowledge update, MS = multi-session.                                                         

> Config LLM SSU SSP SSA TR KU MS Total
> C5 (baseline) GPT-5 0.986 0.700 1.000 0.798 0.925 0.797 0.855 C6 (user-q) GPT-5 0.957 0.667 0.982 0.850 0.885 0.835 0.870 C7 ( k=30) GPT-5 0.986 0.800 1.000 0.917 0.923 0.850 0.912 C12 (mini, k=20) GPT-5-mini 0.986 0.933 1.000 0.902 0.962 0.850 0.922 C14 (mini, k=50) GPT-5-mini 1.000 0.933 1.000 0.932 0.949 0.842 0.928 C15 (mini, k=100) GPT-5-mini 1.000 0.933 0.982 0.917 0.949 0.872 0.930

Table 15: LongMemEval S token consumption per 500-question run. Input tokens scale with k; output tokens remain approximately constant.                      

> Config (LLM) kInput (M) Score
> C6 (GPT-5) 20 2.94 0.870 C7 (GPT-5) 30 4.03 0.912 C8 (GPT-5) 50 6.47 0.890 C12 (GPT-5-mini) 20 2.58 0.922 C14 (GPT-5-mini) 50 5.97 0.928 C15 (GPT-5-mini) 100 9.79 0.930

style, and domain expertise. 

• Build trust through demonstrated recall of past in-teractions. 

• Provide proactive suggestions based on accumulated user knowledge. As AI agents move from novelty to daily utility, per-sonalization through memory will become a differentiat-ing capability. Users will expect their agents to “know” them—and memory systems like MemMachine provide the infrastructure to deliver this expectation. 

# 9.4 Summary vs. Full Context vs. Com-pressed Observations 

A recurring design question is whether to provide the LLM with a summary of past interactions, the full con-versational context, or a compressed intermediate form. Our findings, together with recent work on observational memory [15], suggest that each approach occupies a dis-tinct point in the design space: 

• Full context overwhelms the model, triggers the “lost in the middle” effect [13], and becomes infea-sible as history grows beyond context limits. 

• Summary-only approaches (compaction) lose crit-ical detail, particularly for factual and temporal queries where the exact wording or timing matters. As Mastra’s research notes, compaction produces “documentation-style summaries” that “strip out the specific decisions and tool interactions agents need.” 

• Compressed observations (Mastra) offer a mid-dle ground: event-based logs that preserve structure while achieving 3–40 × compression. This enables prompt caching and stable context windows but sac-rifices the ability to retrieve original episodes on de-mand. 

• MemMachine’s approach —STM summary plus 

selectively retrieved raw episodes—provides a differ-ent tradeoff: the summary gives high-level context, while retrieved episodes supply uncompressed factual grounding. This is particularly important for use cases requiring auditability, compliance, or multi-hop reasoning over exact conversational records. The choice between these approaches depends on the deployment context. For tool-heavy agents generating large outputs (coding agents, SRE agents), compression-first approaches may be optimal. For agents serving do-mains where factual precision matters (healthcare, legal, financial services), ground-truth-preserving retrieval is essential. A promising future direction is hybrid archi-tectures that combine compressed observations for high-level context with on-demand retrieval of raw episodes when precision is needed. 

# 9.5 Single-Agent vs. Multi-Agent Mem-ory 

Memory benefits increase in multi-agent environments: 

• Shared memory enables agents to coordinate with-out redundant information gathering. 

• Specialized agents can deposit domain-specific knowledge that other agents retrieve, enabling emer-gent division of labor. 

• Session continuity allows agent handoffs without context loss. 

• Reduced token usage across the system, as agents share rather than regenerate context. MemMachine’s multi-tenancy architecture (project/session isolation) naturally supports multi-agent deployments where agents share a project-level memory while maintaining session-level isolation for individual conversations. 14 9.6 Privacy and Data Sovereignty 

Memory systems for AI agents raise important privacy considerations. When user conversations are stored and indexed, the data sovereignty question becomes critical: 

• Local LLMs: Running embedding models and LLMs locally (e.g., using Ollama or vLLM) keeps all data on-premises. MemMachine supports local providers through its configurable model architec-ture. 

• Hosted APIs: Using OpenAI, Google, or AWS ser-vices means conversational data traverses third-party infrastructure, subject to their data processing agree-ments. 

• Hybrid approaches: Memory storage can remain local while only anonymized or aggregated queries are sent to hosted LLMs for summarization or inference. MemMachine’s open-source, self-hosted architecture gives organizations full control over their data pipeline. The configurable provider system allows swapping be-tween local and hosted models without code changes, enabling organizations to match their privacy require-ments to their deployment model. 

# 9.7 Limitations and Threats to Validity 

Our results should be interpreted with several limita-tions in mind. First, benchmark outcomes are sensitive to eval-model choice, prompt templates, and provider-side model updates; scores reported here are tied to the specific configurations listed in Section 7. Sec-ond, cross-system comparisons mix re-run results and published numbers, which may differ in preprocess-ing, prompt settings, or infrastructure. Third, while LoCoMo, LongMemEval S, HotpotQA, WikiMultiHop, and EpBench cover important retrieval behaviors, they do not fully represent all production workloads (for example, multilingual, multimodal, or strict real-time constraints). Fourth, token-efficiency comparisons are workload-dependent and should be treated as direc-tional outside the reported setup. Fifth, the Long-MemEval ablation treats each optimization dimension independently; interaction effects between dimensions (e.g., whether chunking benefits change at higher k) re-main unexplored, and the ablation configurations C1– C4 used partial question subsets before being extended to the full 500-question evaluation. We therefore view these results as strong empirical evidence within the evaluated settings rather than universal performance guarantees. 

# 9.8 Architectural Design Tensions 

The VentureBeat analysis of emerging memory architec-tures [15] identifies several key questions that enterprises should consider when selecting a memory approach. We frame these as design tensions that inform MemMa-chine’s positioning: 

Retrieval vs. stable context. Retrieval-based sys-tems (MemMachine, Mem0, Zep) search for relevant memories each turn, which enables access to arbitrar-ily large memory stores but invalidates prompt caches and adds latency. Stable-context systems (Mastra’s ob-servational memory) keep a compressed log always in context, enabling prompt caching but capping the to-tal memory to what fits in the context window. Mem-Machine’s approach provides the scalability of retrieval while its STM component ensures that recent context is always immediately available without a retrieval step. 

Prompt cacheability. Modern LLM providers (OpenAI, Anthropic) offer significant discounts for cached prompt prefixes. Systems that maintain a sta-ble prefix can exploit this for 50–90% cost reduction on cached tokens. MemMachine’s STM summary provides a semi-stable prefix, though retrieved episodes vary per query. This represents an area for future optimiza-tion—for example, caching frequently retrieved episode clusters. 

Infrastructure complexity. MemMachine requires database infrastructure (PostgreSQL, Neo4j) but pro-vides full control over data persistence and query pat-terns. Text-only approaches (Mastra) eliminate the need for specialized databases but may become con-strained as memory volume grows. For enterprises with existing database infrastructure, MemMachine’s approach integrates naturally; for teams seeking mini-mal infrastructure, simpler architectures may be prefer-able initially. 

Memory as a top-level primitive. There is grow-ing consensus that memory is one of the essential primi-tives for production AI agents, alongside tool use, work-flow orchestration, observability, and guardrails. Mem-Machine’s design as a standalone, framework-agnostic memory layer—accessible via REST API, Python SDK, and MCP—reflects this view. Agents should be able to adopt memory without being locked into a specific orchestration framework. Table 16 summarizes the architectural tradeoffs across representative memory systems. 

# 9.9 When Memory Helps (and When It Doesn’t) 

Memory provides clear benefits for: 

• Multi-session interactions (customer support, health-care, education). 

• Personalization-dependent applications (content rec-ommendations, personal assistants). 

• Complex workflows requiring state persistence (project management, CRM). 

• Compliance and audit scenarios requiring interaction history. Memory may be unnecessary or counterproductive for: 15 Table 16: Architectural design space comparison across agent memory systems.                                                             

> Property MemMachine Mem0 Zep Mastra OM MemOS Full Context
> Memory approach Retrieval Retrieval Retrieval In-context Hybrid In-context Ground truth preserved ✓Partial Partial ×Partial ✓
> Prompt cacheable Partial ××✓×✓
> Scales beyond context window ✓✓✓×✓×
> LLM calls per message Low High Moderate Moderate High None Specialized DB required Yes Yes Yes No Yes No Parametric/KV-cache memory ××××✓×
> Works with closed-source LLMs ✓✓✓✓Partial ✓
> Open source ✓Partial Partial ✓✓N/A

• Single-turn, stateless queries (search, translation, simple QA). 

• High-volume, low-personalization tasks (batch pro-cessing, data extraction). 

• Scenarios where privacy constraints prohibit storing interaction history. 

# 10 Future Work 

Several directions merit investigation: 

• Procedural memory: Extending MemMachine to store and retrieve learned action patterns, tool-use strategies, and workflow recipes. 

• Enhanced temporal reasoning: Developing ded-icated temporal indexing and query expansion tech-niques to improve performance on temporal bench-marks. 

• LongMemEval M evaluation: Extending evalua-tion to LongMemEval M (500 sessions, ∼1.5M tokens per question), which tests memory at production scale. 

• Adaptive retrieval depth: Implementing query-complexity-aware k selection, informed by our finding that optimal k depends on both the query type and the downstream answer model. 

• Memory consolidation and forgetting: Imple-menting cognitive-inspired mechanisms for prioritiz-ing frequently accessed memories and gracefully re-tiring stale information. 

• Multi-modal memory: Supporting images, audio, and structured data alongside conversational text. 

• Additional database backends: Expanding sup-port to ChromaDB, Milvus, and other vector stores. 

• Reinforcement learning integration: Using benchmark feedback to optimize retrieval strategies through learned policies. 

• Retrieval Agent extensions: Expanding the agent tool tree with specialized agents for temporal rea-soning, aggregation queries, and comparative anal-ysis. Implementing budget enforcement (token cost ceilings, latency limits) with automatic fallback to cheaper strategies. Enabling per-agent LLM tier se-lection for cost optimization. 

• Adaptive retrieval budgets: Dynamically adjust-ing per-sub-query retrieval limits based on query complexity estimates and accumulated evidence, re-ducing redundant episode retrieval in fan-out and chain-of-query strategies. 

• Function-calling code mode: Investigating function-calling architectures where agents emit structured executable code (for example, Python or TypeScript) rather than invoking large predefined tool lists. Code executes in a secure interpreter that handles data processing, dynamic tool discov-ery, and multi-step chaining with fewer repeated LLM roundtrips. Prior reports indicate large token sav-ings for massive toolsets (for example, 98.7% in An-thropic’s MCP code execution workflow and up to 99.9% in Cloudflare’s Code Mode) [19, 20]. We will evaluate both client-side and server-side variants, in-cluding dynamic directory-based schema loading and low-overhead search/execute proxy patterns. 

# 11 Conclusion 

We have presented MemMachine, an open-source mem-ory system for AI agents that prioritizes ground truth preservation, cost efficiency, and personalization. Through a two-tier architecture of short-term and long-term episodic memory augmented by profile memory, MemMachine provides agents with the ability to store, recall, and reason over past experiences without the high cost and error accumulation inherent in LLM-dependent extraction approaches. Our evaluation spans multiple benchmarks. On Lo-CoMo, MemMachine achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance (0.9169 with gpt-4.1-mini) with approximately 80% fewer tokens than Mem0. On LongMemEval S,a systematic ablation across six optimization di-mensions achieves 93.0% overall accuracy and re-veals that retrieval-stage optimizations—particularly re-trieval depth tuning (+4.2%) and context formatting (+2.0%)—dominate over ingestion-stage changes, and that smaller models (GPT-5-mini) outperform larger models (GPT-5) when co-optimized with appropriate prompts. The Retrieval Agent extends these capa-16 bilities to multi-hop queries, achieving 93.2% on Hot-potQA hard and 92.6% on WikiMultiHop with random-ized noise—demonstrating that MemMachine’s ground-truth-preserving architecture is composable: intelligent retrieval strategies can be layered on top without mod-ifying the underlying storage model. As AI agents transition from experimental technol-ogy to production infrastructure, the quality of their memory systems will determine the quality of their per-sonalization, accuracy, and trustworthiness. MemMa-chine provides a foundation for this next generation of memory-augmented agents. 

# References 

[1] Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as Operating Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 , 2024. [2] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. Generative Agents: Interac-tive Simulacra of Human Behavior. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03442 , 2023. [3] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks. In NeurIPS , 2020. [4] Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taran-jeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Building Production-Ready AI Agents with Scalable Long-Term Memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413 ,2025. [5] Preston Rasmussen, Pavlo Paliychuk, Travis Beau-vais, Jack Ryan, and Daniel Chalef. Zep: A Tempo-ral Knowledge Graph Architecture for Agent Mem-ory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13956 , 2025. [6] Adyasha Maharana, Dong-Ho Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, Mohit Bansal, Francesco Barbieri, and Yuwei Fang. Evaluating Very Long-Term Conversational Memory of LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17753 , 2024. [7] Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. Long-MemEval: Benchmarking Chat Assistants on Long-Term Interactive Memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10813 , 2024. Accepted at ICLR 2025. [8] Alexis Huet, Zied Ben Houidi, and Dario Rossi. Episodic Memories Generation and Evaluation Benchmark for Large Language Models. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [9] Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yue Yue, et al. Memory in the Age of AI Agents: A Survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13564 , 2025. [10] Endel Tulving. Episodic and Semantic Memory. In E. Tulving and W. Donaldson, editors, Organiza-tion of Memory , pages 381–403. Academic Press, 1972. [11] Richard C. Atkinson and Richard M. Shiffrin. Hu-man Memory: A Proposed System and Its Control Processes. In K. W. Spence and J. T. Spence, ed-itors, The Psychology of Learning and Motivation ,volume 2, pages 89–195. Academic Press, 1968. [12] Tibor Kiss and Jan Strunk. Unsupervised Multilin-gual Sentence Boundary Detection. Computational Linguistics , 32(4):485–525, 2006. [13] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:157– 173, 2024. [14] Yu Wang, Chi Han, Tongtong Wu, Xiaoxin He, Wangchunshu Zhou, Nafis Sadeq, Xiusi Chen, Zexue He, Wei Wang, Gholamreza Haffari, et al. 

Towards Lifespan Cognitive Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.13265 , 2024. [15] Tyler Barnes and Sam Bhagwat. Observational Memory: A Human-Inspired Memory System for AI Agents. Mastra Technical Report, 2026. https: //mastra.ai/research .[16] Zhiyu Li, Chenyang Xi, Chunyu Li, Ding Chen, Boyu Chen, Shichao Song, Simin Niu, Hanyu Wang, et al. MemOS: A Memory OS for AI System. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03724 , 2025. [17] Zhiyu Li, Shichao Song, Hanyu Wang, Simin Niu, Ding Chen, Jiawei Yang, Chenyang Xi, et al. MemOS: An Operating System for Memory-Augmented Generation (MAG) in Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22101 , 2025. [18] Xiao Luo, Yuxuan Zhang, Zheng He, Zifeng Wang, Sixun Zhao, Dongming Li, Long K. Qiu, and Yang Yang. Agent Lightning: Train ANY AI Agents with Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03680 , 2025. [19] Anthropic. Code execution with MCP. Engi-neering blog, 2025. https://www.anthropic.com/ engineering/code-execution-with-mcp .17 [20] Cloudflare. Introducing Code Mode for MCP servers. Cloudflare blog, 2025. https://blog. cloudflare.com/code-mode-mcp/ .[21] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdi-nov, and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A Dataset for Diverse, Explainable Multi-hop Ques-tion Answering. In Proceedings of EMNLP , 2018. 18